Oncogene Breathing new insights into the role of mutant p53 in lung cancer Tianwei Chen1,2, Lauren M. Ashwood3,4, Olga Kondrashova Kate D. Sutherland 1,2 ✉ 3,4, Andreas Strasser , Gemma Kelly 1,2 ✉ 1,2 ✉ and © The Author(s) 2024 The tumour suppressor gene p53 is one of the most frequently mutated genes in lung cancer and these defects are associated with poor prognosis, albeit some debate exists in the lung cancer ﬁeld. Despite extensive research, the exact mechanisms by which mutant p53 proteins promote the development and sustained expansion of cancer remain unclear. This review will discuss the cellular responses controlled by p53 that contribute to tumour suppression, p53 mutant lung cancer mouse models and characterisation of p53 mutant lung cancer. Furthermore, we discuss potential approaches of targeting mutant p53 for the treatment of lung cancer. Oncogene ; : , ; ) ( 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 (Fig. 1). THE TUMOUR SUPPRESSOR P53 The p53 gene (generic name used here, also known as TP53 in humans and Trp53 in mouse) encodes the tumour suppressor protein p53 (TP53/TRP53), a transcription factor that can regulate diverse cellular processes, including apoptotic cell death, adaptation of cellular metabolism, cell cycle arrest, cellular senescence and DNA damage repair In unstressed cells, p53 proteins levels are kept low, since it is ubiquitinated by the E3 ligase mouse double minute 2 (MDM2) (called HDM2 in humans), thereby targeting it for proteasomal degradation. Stress conditions, such as DNA damage, hypoxia, nutrient deprivation or oncogene activation, lead to the inhibition of MDM2 and/or direct modiﬁcation of p53, resulting in the stabilisation and thus activation of the p53 protein. p53 proteins then bind as homotetramers to the promoter regions of ~500 direct target genes and induce their expression to activate apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, DNA repair and other cellular processes . Initially, suppressor, Although p53 has been widely recognised as an important the exact mechanisms by which this tumour transcription factor prevents tumour development is not fully understood. the induction of apoptosis was the principal mechanism for tumour suppression by p53. However, numerous studies have shown that additional cellular processes must also be involved. Here, the major cellular processes that can be induced by p53 and how they contribute to tumour suppression will be discussed individually. it was thought that Apoptosis is a form of programmed cell death that is important for embryonic development, and the maintenance of tissue homoeostasis by removing no longer needed or potentially dangerous (e.g. infected or early neoplastic) cells . Apoptosis can occur through two distinct yet converging pathways, the intrinsic (aka mitochondrial, stress-induced or BCL-2 regulated, BAX/BAKdependent) or extrinsic (aka death receptor-induced) pathways . The intrinsic apoptotic pathway is regulated by the proteins of the B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) family . The BCL-2 family of proteins are divided into three subgroups: the pro-apoptotic BH3-only proteins, such as Bcl-2 Interacting Mediator of cell death (BIM), the p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) and phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced protein 1 (NOXA), which are initiators of apoptosis; the pro-survival proteins, such as BCL-2, BCL-XL and MCL-1, which are the guardians that inhibit apoptosis; and the pro-apoptotic effectors of apoptosis, BAX, BAK (and BOK), with the ﬁrst two inhibited by the pro-survival BCL2 proteins in healthy cells . The genes that encode the BH3-only proteins, PUMA and NOXA, have been identiﬁed as direct target genes of p53, whereas the gene that encodes the BH3-only protein BIM can be indirectly induced by p53 . Upon certain the cellular expression of PUMA, NOXA and BIM, which inhibit the prosurvival BCL-2 proteins, leading to the activation of the effectors of apoptosis, BAX and BAK. It has been reported that BAX and BAK can also be directly activated by some BH3-only proteins . When activated, BAX and BAK oligomerise and cause mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilisation (MOMP). This leads to the release of apoptogenic factors, such as cytochrome c and SMAC/ DIABLO into the cytoplasm. Cytochrome c binds to apoptotic peptidase-activating factor 1 (APAF-1) and this adaptor platform induces activation of the initiator caspase, caspase-9. Caspase-9 then proteolytically activates the downstream effector caspases (i.e. caspases-3, (-6) and -7) and this caspase cascade causes the ordered dismantling of the dying cells . The extrinsic apoptotic stresses, p53 is activated and then increases 1Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia. 2Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia. 3QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, QLD, Australia. 4The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. email: ; ; ✉ Received: 8 July 2024 Revised: 25 October 2024 Accepted: 1 November 2024 Published online: 20 November 2024 116 T. Fig. 1 Cellular processes regulated by p53. p53 regulates diverse cellular processes via the transcriptional regulation of target genes. Some cellular processes that contribute to the tumour suppressive function of p53 include apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, cell senescence, DNA repair and cell metabolism. Some genes essential for carrying out these processes are indicated. pathway is triggered by the stimulation of death receptors, such as FAS, by their ligands, such as FASL, on the plasma membrane. This activates the initiator caspase, caspase-8, through the adaptor protein FADD. Activated caspase-8 can trigger apoptosis either directly by proteolytically activating the downstream effector caspases, caspases-3, (-6) and -7, however can also proteolytically activate the BH3-only protein BID, thereby increasing effector caspase activation by engaging the intrinsic apoptotic pathway (see above) . p53 is thought to also be involved in the regulation of the death receptor apoptotic pathway by upregulating target genes, such as those for FAS , Death Receptor 5 (DR5) , TNF receptor-associated protein 4 (TRAF4) and SUSD6 (DRAGO; TMPS; KIAA0247) . Of note, cells lacking FAS (e.g. from lpr mutant mice) or cells overall deﬁcient in death lacking FADD function) are receptor-induced apoptosis (e.g. resistant to apoptosis induced by activation of p53 by γ-radiation or DNA damage-inducing drugs . Therefore, the upregulation of these genes by p53 possibly serves to sensitise cells to apoptosis by cytotoxic T cells and natural killer (NK) cells, which can express the ligands for death receptors. The ability of p53 to induce apoptosis was ﬁrst revealed in a study using a myeloid leukaemia cell line in which expression of wildtype (WT) p53 was induced . Subsequently, using gene knockout mice, it was shown that p53 is essential for the induction of apoptosis triggered by agents that cause DNA damage, including γ-radiation and certain chemotherapeutic drugs, such as etoposide or cisplatin . Later work demonstrated that the combined absence of the p53 target genes encoding the proapoptotic BH3-only proteins PUMA and NOXA (and to a lesser extent loss of PUMA alone) rendered lymphoid cells as resistant to DNA damage-inducing agents as loss of p53 itself . This demonstrated that transcriptional induction of PUMA and NOXA accounts for all p53-induced apoptosis. As soon as p53 was shown to be able to induce apoptosis it was predicted that this is one of, if not the sole, mechanism by which p53 prevents tumorigenesis. Consistent with this notion, loss of PUMA accelerates c-MYC overexpression induced lymphoma development in mice . However, even combined loss of PUMA and NOXA accelerated c-MYC induced lymphomagenesis to a considerably lesser extent than loss of only a single allele of p53 (p53+/−) . This demonstrates that p53 must suppress tumour development not only through induction of apoptosis, but also through activation of additional processes. Cell cycle arrest and cell senescence, the latter a process of irreversible cell cycle arrest, are protective mechanisms for maintaining tissue homoeostasis, and can function as complementary mechanisms to programmed cell death for tumour suppression . Cell cycle arrest and cell senescence can be triggered by shortening of telomeres, a feature of aged cells, as well as in response to various environmental and cellular stresses, such as nutrient deprivation, DNA damage and oncogene expression. One of the most extensively studied pathways of induction of cell cycle arrest and cell senescence is through the direct transcriptional induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 by p53, resulting in arrest at the G1/S boundary . Oncogene In addition to proliferation arrest, senescent cells also exhibit to their morphology (increased ﬂattening) and alterations metabolism with the activation of the so-called senescenceassociated secretory phenotype (SASP), whereby the cells secrete cytokines, chemokines and proteases, that have profound effects on neighbouring cells in the tumour microenvironment (TME) . transformation of p53 has been shown to be essential for oncogene-induced senescence . For example, the expression of mutant Rat sarcoma virus (RAS) in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts results in permanent G1 cell cycle arrest accompanied by a signiﬁcant increase in the level of p53 and the expression of many of its target genes, including p21. The loss or mutation of p53 prevents mutant RAS induced cell cycle arrest and senescence, thereby promoting the malignant these cells . However, in recent years some studies have provided evidence that senescent cells can under certain conditions also promote tumorigenesis . The depletion of senescent cells in aging mice delayed age-related morbidity and decreased the incidence of tumorigenesis and cancer-related death . This is thought to be due to the removal of the SASP that may promote tumorigenesis by inducing chronic inﬂammation, a known driver of tumorigenesis . Moreover, it has been reported that under certain conditions senescent cancer cells are capable of exiting from their growth arrested state, thereby re-starting tumour expansion . These features of senescent cells are identiﬁed as the emerging hallmarks and enabling characteristics of cancer . Although p53 induced apoptosis via PUMA and NOXA and cell senescence via p21 play critical roles in preventing cells from malignant transformation, these two mechanisms are dispensable for p53-mediated suppression of spontaneous tumour development. Remarkably, none of Puma−/−, Noxa−/−, Puma−/−;Noxa−/− or even Puma−/−;Noxa−/−;p21−/− mice spontaneously developed tumours even when aged to >450 days. In contrast, p53−/− mice (on a C57BL/6 background) develop tumours spontaneously with a 100% incidence within 280 days . Similarly, mice with p53 mutations that impair the transcriptional activation of p21, Puma and Noxa, but retain the ability to induce the transcription of certain other p53 target genes, also do not develop tumours spontaneously . Collectively, these ﬁndings indicate that p53mediated tumour suppression is a complex process and that p53 than Puma, Noxa and p21 and cellular target genes other processes in addition to apoptosis and cell cycle arrest/cell senescence must also be involved. DNA damage repair is a critical cellular response to maintain genomic integrity after the exposure to endogenous or exogenous DNA damaging agents . Failure of DNA damage repair can result in genomic instability and mutations, and this is also identiﬁed as a hallmark of cancer . Several DNA damage response processes operate in cells to prevent propagation of DNA lesions. For example, nucleotide excision repair (NER) removes adducts of DNA lesions commonly caused by UV irradiation and is one of the major mechanisms that protect cells from neoplasm, mutagenesis and cytotoxicity . On the other hand, base excision repair (BER) corrects oxidative modiﬁcations of the DNA bases . DNA double stranded breaks (DSB) are typically induced by ionising radiation or spontaneously during DNA replication. These lesions are repaired through homologous recombination (HR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). rectiﬁes nucleotides that have been Mismatch repair incorrectly inserted into DNA during the replication process . Many studies have provided evidence that p53 plays an important role in maintaining genome stability and suppressing tumorigenesis by activating a variety of DNA damage repair (MMR) Oncogene T. 117 pathways . The earliest connection between p53 , where they found that human cells in which normal p53 function was disrupted by either the human papillomavirus E6 oncoprotein or expression of a transgene encoding a dominant-negative mutant of p53 showed signiﬁcantly reduced tolerance to UV irradiation . In BER, various interactions were described between p53 and APE1/Ref-1, the apurinic and apyrimidinic (AP) endonucleases that are essential for the removal of damaged bases and subsequently the repair of the AP sites . It was reported that APE1/Ref-1 can promote the tetramerization of p53 and regulate its trans-activation and pro-apoptotic functions . Interestingly, p53 was found to directly supress the transcription of APE1. This function is thought to be related to the tumour suppressive role of p53, as the downregulation of BER can bias the cellular response towards apoptosis in cells with highly damaged DNA . Functions of p53 in MMR are mainly exerted through its transcriptional induction of the gene encoding the MMR core component MSH2. However, MSH2 is also found to function in NER, BER and HR. Therefore, p53dependent induction of MSH2 expression may also be involved in other DNA damage repair pathways . Additionally, p53 has been shown to activate the HR pathway by both direct and indirect interactions with RAD51 . Other studies have shown that p53 can also mediate HR by interacting with other proteins, such as the ATM/ATR checkpoint kinases . The role of p53 in NHEJ is less well studied compared to those in HR. It is known that p53 can promote NHEJ by interacting with components of the NHEJ pathway, such as XRCC4 and DNA ligase IV . However, these interactions remain largely unclear. Recently, a p53-dependent gene ring ﬁnger protein 144b (Rnf144b) has been found to be involved in the repair of DNA DSBs and is shown to have a pivotal tumour suppressive function, particularly in lung adenocarcinoma . In addition, an in vivo shRNA library screen and validation using CRISPR induced gene deletion revealed that the loss of several p53-regulated DNA repair genes can markedly accelerate c-MYC-driven lymphomagenesis and the removal of Mlh1, a key gene involved in MMR, can even on its own promote spontaneous tumour development . Overall, these ﬁndings demonstrate that coordination of DNA damage repair contributes substantially to p53-mediated tumour suppression. the molecular mechanisms of Recent studies have demonstrated that p53 may also prevent tumour development through the regulation of cell metabolism. The emerging role of p53 in metabolic rewiring in cancer has been comprehensively explored in several recent reviews , and we discuss this topic here only relatively brieﬂy. p53 has been reported to play important roles in the control of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), a cellular process that produces adenosine triphosphate (ATP). p53 enhances OXPHOS by inducing the expression of cytochrome c oxidase 2 (SCO2). In addition, p53 is known to negatively regulate cellular glycolysis by directly or indirectly inhibiting the expression of glucose transporters (GLUTs) or the translocation of GLUT1 to the plasma membrane, leading to decreased glucose uptake . p53 can also inﬂuence glucose metabolism by direct or indirect regulation of the expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in this process, such as p53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator (TIGAR) . The activation of TIGAR leads to a decrease in fructose-2,6-bisphosphate, which subsequently halts glycolysis. the absence of Tigar does not promote tumour However, development, indicating that it does not exert a pivotal role in p53-mediated tumour suppression . p53 can also negatively regulate other cellular pathways involved in glycolysis, such as the PI3K/AKT signalling pathway to suppress glycolysis in cells . Tumour cells often undergo 118 T. Fig. 2 Consequences of point mutation for p53 function. WT p53 proteins bind to DNA and activate the downstream signalling pathways. A Loss of function (LOF) effects of mutant p53 abrogate normal p53-mediated cellular processes. B Dominant negative effects (DNE) of mutant p53 are a consequence of mixed tetramers containing both WT and mutant p53 proteins, which are signiﬁcantly less efﬁcient at activating the WT p53 target genes compared to tetramers containing only WT p53. C Gain of function (GOF) effects of mutant p53 proteins are thought to be exerted by binding to and modulating the functions of transcription factors not bound and impacted by WT p53. metabolic reprogramming to support increased cell growth and proliferation. Most tumours experience a signiﬁcant increase in glycolysis due to insufﬁcient OXPHOS, which was ﬁrst and was named as the Warburg effect . Recent studies suggest that mutations or loss of p53 in tumours could be a leading factor that results in the Warburg effect . Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are by-products of OXPHOS generated when cells sustain genotoxic damage or mitochondrial stress and they are known to contribute to tissue damage and tumorigenesis . Furthermore, p53 has been shown to regulate cell metabolism through crosstalk with various cellular pathways, such as the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathways . The mTOR pathway can be activated by high levels of nutrients and energy, such as a high ATP/ADP ratio, growth factors and oxygen, which promote anabolism and inhibit catabolism . Conversely, a low energy state (i.e. a low ATP/ADP ratio) activates AMPK, which in turn promotes catabolism and inhibits anabolism . AMPK and mTOR are key regulators of autophagy, which is a self-eating process to degrade proteins, organelles and membranes, thereby recycling macromolecules for production of energy in response to cellular stress . Several studies have suggested that WT p53 can induce autophagy in cancer cells via the activation of AMPK and the suppression of mTOR by transcriptional induction of the genes encoding phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) and tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1) , whereas autophagy is inhibited in p53 mutant cancer cells . Moreover, cancer cells expressing mutant p53 exhibit increased sensitivity to mTOR inhibition compared to cancer cells with WT p53 . This supports the importance of p53 in regulating the mTOR signalling pathway to suppress tumour development. Collectively, these ﬁndings suggest critical, albeit not yet well understood, roles of p53 in metabolic regulation and the prevention of tumorigenesis. P53 MUTANT CANCERS p53 mutations occur in ~50% of human cancers and are commonly associated with poor therapy responses and poor patient outcomes . People with Li-Fraumeni syndrome that inherit one mutant p53 allele and one WT p53 allele have an ~50% likelihood of developing cancer by the age of 35 and a ~90% risk of developing cancer throughout their lifetime . Although over 2000 different mutations in the p53 gene have been reported in human cancers , most mutations occur at six hotspot amino acid residues in the DNA-binding domain (R175, G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282) . Mutations have also been found in other domains of p53, but their effects on tumorigenesis are less well the selection for known . Moreover, hotspot mutant p53 in cancers . Interestingly, the frequency of different p53 mutations varies the mechanisms of remains unclear still this variability are that dramatically between cancer types . Two possible explanations speciﬁc mutations can be for (i) preferentially enriched due to differences in mutational aetiologies (e.g. exposure to different carcinogens), and (ii) individual hotspot mutations may exhibit distinct tumorigenic potential in different tissues . Mutant p53 is proposed to promote tumour development in three ways (Fig. 2). Loss of function (LOF) effects abrogate normal p53-mediated cellular processes, leading to defects in cell cycle arrest, evasion of apoptosis and genomic instability . Dominant negative effects (DNE) are thought to result from the formation of mixed tetramers containing both WT p53 and mutant p53 proteins. In this setting, such mixed tetramers are signiﬁcantly less efﬁcient at activating target genes compared to WT p53 homo-tetramers . The DNE of mutant p53 can be critical during early stages of tumour development when cells express both the WT and mutant p53 alleles , as at diagnosis most mutant p53 expressing cancers have lost the WT p53 allele (loss of heterozygosity). The reported gain of function (GOF) effects of mutant p53 proteins are thought to be exerted by binding to and modulating the functions of certain transcription factors (e.g. erythroblast transformation speciﬁc proteins) that are not bound and impacted by WT p53 . Indeed, enforced expression of mutant p53 in p53-deﬁcient mouse or human cell lines has been reported to lead to new phenotypes , supporting the GOF effects of mutant p53. Moreover, previous studies showed that different p53 mutations may have distinct oncogenic properties, and these mutations may promote tumour development beyond the LOF effect. For example, several mouse models have shown that certain mutant p53 proteins are able to enhance the invasion and motility of cancer cells compared to In addition, Liwhat Fraumeni patients with certain hotspot p53 mutations, such as R248Q, show earlier onset of malignant disease compared with patients that harbour mutations that cause a loss of p53 protein . This may, however, also be ascribed to the DNE of R248Q mutant p53 protein. The relative importance of the LOF, DNE and GOF effects of mutant p53 in the initiation, sustained growth and metastasis of cancer is still hotly debated, as is how the different p53 mutations affect these tumorigenic processes. Adding to the complexity, p53 mutations have been reported to occur at different stages of malignant transformation . It is therefore possible that mutant p53 proteins may contribute differently to tumorigenesis depending on the timing of the acquisition of the mutation and the context of co-existing oncogenic drivers. This still requires substantial further investigation. is seen in p53-deﬁcient mice . Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide, with a 5-year survival rate of <15% . Lung cancer Oncogene T. 119 Fig. 3 p53 missense mutations in human LUAD. Frequencies of p53 mutants in LUAD patients with p53 missense mutations (N = 514) were obtained from the GENIE BPC NSCLC v2.0 cohort , with domains of the p53 protein displayed below . The protein schematic was generated using the drawProteins package . TAD transactivation domain, PRD proline-rich domain, DBD DNA-binding domain, TET tetramerisation domain, CTD C-terminal regulatory domain. is a highly heterogenous disease that can be classiﬁed into four histopathological subtypes. Approximately 15% percent of lung cancer cases are classiﬁed as small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The remaining ~85% of cases are classiﬁed as non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which can be further divided into adenocarcinoma (LUAD; ~40% of NSCLC), squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC, ~25% of NSCLC) and large cell carcinoma (~15% of NSCLC) . i. Lung adenocarcinoma rearrangements of somatic alterations LUAD, the most prevalent subtype of NSCLC, is characterised by its glandular differentiation and is located most frequently in the periphery of the lung . The genomic is distinct between landscape of different lung cancer subtypes, and a number of molecular subtypes have been identiﬁed in LUAD based on their oncogenic drivers . For example, activating mutations of the gene encoding epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) the genes encoding or KRAS, or anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) or ROS proto-oncogene 1 (ROS1) have led to the oncogene-centric molecular classiﬁcation of NSCLC . Although there are known associations between subtypes of lung cancer with distinct oncogenic drivers and their histological appearance as well as growth patterns , tumours driven by the same oncogenic alterations can exhibit signiﬁcant molecular and clinical heterogeneity . This is in part due to the diversity of oncogenes that drive the different cases of lung . For example, KRAS mutations have been cancer observed in various codons, with the majority of mutations occurring at codon 12, while mutations at codons 13, 10 and 61 are less frequent . In NSCLC, the most common KRAS mutations include KRASG12C (39%), KRASG12V (18–21%) and KRASG12D (17–18%) . The G12D mutation is more common in non-smoking NSCLC patients, whereas the G12C mutation is more prevalent in smoking NSCLC patients . These different amino acid substitutions exert distinct impact on the downstream mitogen-activated Oncogene protein kinase (MAPK) signalling pathway, involving PI3K/ AKT, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEKK) and RAS-like (RAL) GTPases. These are important factors that contribute to the overall survival (OS) and therapeutic response of lung cancer patients . These subgroups of KRAS-mutant LUAD exhibit different responses to anticancer therapeutics and have distinct impact on the TME . There is emerging evidence that co-occurrence of speciﬁc mutations in oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes can contribute to the molecular and clinical heterogeneity in lung cancer . For example, mutations of p53, mutations or loss of liver kinase B1 (LKB1) (also known as serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11)), which is frequently associated with the loss of Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1), and bi-allelic inactivation of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2B) have been identiﬁed as three major co-occurring genetic alterations in KRAS-mutant LUAD. Like for many other cancers, mutations in p53 are common in lung cancer and certain hotspot mutants predominate. The most common p53 mutations in human LUAD occur at codon R273, while mutations at R175, which frequently occur in other cancer types, are less common in LUAD In human NSCLC, conﬂicting results have been (Fig. 3). reported on the role of p53 mutations as a prognostic marker , likely due to the differing functional effects of speciﬁc p53 mutations. These ﬁndings highlight the importance of further categorising lung cancers with mutant KRAS and mutant p53 based on their genotype, including particular mutations in p53. Conventional therapies for NSCLC include surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, either alone or in combination . Surgical resection is recommended for patients with early-stage NSCLC without other morbidities . Platinum-based chemotherapy (e.g. cisplatin) in combination with other cytotoxic agents are standard regimens for patients with advanced lung cancer and they have been 120 T. shown to signiﬁcantly improve patient survival. However, these treatments have substantial toxicity and the recurstill high . rence rate of malignant disease is Immunotherapy is a new modality for cancer therapy. Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) agents, such as antibodies that inhibit PD-(L)1 or CTLA-4, have been used with success in the treatment of many cancers, including NSCLC . This has demonstrated higher clinical efﬁcacy compared with conventional therapies in NSCLC . However, only a small subset of patients experience durable anti-tumour responses upon anti-PD-1 treatment, and accurate biomarkers predictive of response to such therapies are yet to be deﬁned . Targeted therapy has transformed the therapeutic landscape of lung cancer over few decades. The identiﬁcation of the past targetable genetic alterations has allowed for individualised therapies, and this has signiﬁcantly improved the response rate and progression-free survival. Current Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved targeted therapies include tyrosine kinase inhibitors inhibiting EGFR, ALK, ROS1, RET, BRAF V600E, MET Exon14 or NTRK . For decades, KRAS was considered an elusive target for direct inhibition. Recently, however, sotorasib (AMG 510), a KRASG12C selective inhibitor has been approved by the FDA as a second-line treatment for patients with advanced KRASG12C mutant NSCLC. This treatment has demonstrated remarkable efﬁcacy with substantial response and disease control rates . A second KRASG12C inhibitor, adagrasib (MRTX849), has also produced promising outcomes in clinical trials and several other KRASG12C inhibitors have entered clinical studies . However, there are currently no approved inhibitors of other KRAS mutants. Recent studies have reported that two drugs, MRTX1133 and BI-KRASG12D1-3, are able to selectively inhibit the viability of KRASG12D mutant tumour cells in clinical trials . In addition, several indirect pan-KRAS inhibitors are currently under investigation . ii. Small cell lung cancer SCLC is a clinically and histologically distinct subgroup of lung cancer and is identiﬁed as one of the high-grade lung cancers of neuroendocrine origin . This is a highly aggressive disease due to its high growth rate, early metastasis and poor prognosis. As a result, more than two-thirds of patients present with metastatic SCLC at the time of diagnosis . Over 90% of SCLC patients are current or past smokers, and the risk of SCLC increases with smoking duration and intensity . Unlike NSCLC, the classiﬁcation of SCLC is not deﬁned by its somatic mutations, but according to the expression of lineagespeciﬁc transcription factors. In seminal ﬁndings , SCLC subtypes were deﬁned by the expression of four transcription factors: achaete-scute homologue 1 (ASCL1), neurogenic differentiation factor 1 (NEUROD1), yesassociated protein 1 (YAP1) and POU class 2 homeobox 3 (POU2F3) . Notably, SCLC tumour cells expressing ASCL1 and NEUROD1 exhibit neuroendocrine features whereas those expressing YAP1 and POU2F3 exhibit a neuroendocrine low phenotype . However, there is increasing evidence that YAP1 does not deﬁne a distinct subtype of SCLC. Instead, a group of SCLC tumours was identiﬁed with low expression of ASCL1, NEUROD1 and POU2F3. This subtype shows a unique gene expression signature involving human leucocyte antigens and many immune checkpoint regulators, including PD-L1 and CTLA-4. Therefore, this subtype is called SCLC-Inﬂamed and has been found to show greater response to ICB therapy compared with other subtypes of SCLC . To date, no deﬁnitive positive selection marker exist to identify this rarer subtype of SCLC tumours . the tumour Genomic proﬁling of SCLC has revealed the nearly suppressor genes p53 loss of universal (75–90%) (almost and retinoblastoma (RB1) 100%) . Apart from these shared features, other genetic alterations, such as the loss of PTEN, NOTCH receptors and the CREB binding protein, are also observed and the importance of these defects has been functionally validated in vivo and in vitro . Epigenetic and transcriptomic analyses have identiﬁed the ampliﬁcation of the MYC family proto-oncogenes (MYC, MYCL and MYCN) , with MYCL being associated with the ASCL1-subtype and MYC being associated with other subtypes . in the MycT58A, NEUROD1high mouse model of SCLC, the stabilisation of the mutant MYC protein was shown to promote cell transformation and the proliferation of lung cancer cells . In addition, The standard treatment for patients with limited-stage SCLC is concurrent radiation and chemotherapy which typically includes platinum-based agents in combination with etoposide . About 20% patients will achieve longterm control of malignant disease. However, disease relapse occurs in most patients, probably due to the selection for surviving treatment insensitive malignant cells, possibly socalled cancer stem cells . Patients with metastatic disease are treated with platinum plus etoposide combination therapy. Recently, several studies have demonstrated that in immunotherapy such as anti-PD-L1 antibodies, addition to the standard platinum plus etoposide regimen can improve the progression-free and OS in a small subset of these patients . Despite the beneﬁts brought by immunotherapies, SCLC still remains a largely lethal disease and there are no approved targeted therapies for SCLC. Therefore, a better understanding of the biology of SCLC is urgently required to identify new therapeutic vulnerabilities. INSIGHTS INTO THE ROLE OF MUTANT P53 IN LUNG CANCER Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) enlighten the study of human cancers, as the gene modiﬁcations in GEMMs mimic the oncogenic mutations underpinning cancer formation in humans and enable the study of speciﬁc oncogenic driver events. Mutations of KRAS (32%) and p53 (46%) are two of the most common gene mutations in LUAD and the co-occurrence of these two gene mutations is frequently observed . In GEMMs of lung cancer, the KrasLSL-G12D/+ mouse model is the most widely used mutation for the study of KRAS-mutant LUAD. In this model a loxstop-lox (LSL) cassette was inserted upstream of the transcriptional start site within a mutant KrasG12D allele knocked into the endogenous Kras gene. Intra-nasal delivery of a CRE recombinase results in DNA recombination between the loxP sites, leading to the removal of the stop codon and consequently the expression of mutant Kras . The expression of oncogenic KRASG12D protein in murine lung epithelial cells induces the formation of adenomas that recapitulate early-stage lesions observed in human LUAD . The KrasLSL-G12D/+ mouse model of lung cancer with conditional inactivation of the p53 allele was ﬁrst generated by the Jacks Laboratory . In addition to the modiﬁcation of the Kras allele in a more aggressive model, exons 2–10 of the p53 allele are also ﬂanked by loxP sites, which results in the deletion of the p53 allele when CRE is expressed . Loss of p53 cooperates with oncogenic Kras to induce LUAD with increased invasiveness and accelerates the progression from adenomas to adenocarcinomas . Other studies using Kras-mutant LUAD mouse models Oncogene T. 121 Table 1. Summary of p53 mutant lung cancer mouse models. Cancer type Lung adenomas Genotypes KrasLSL-G12D/+ KrasLSL-G12D/+;p53ﬂ/ﬂ Features Recapitulates early-stage lesions observed in human LUAD Increased invasiveness and accelerated progression from adenomas to adenocarcinomas KrasLA1;p53-/- KrasLSL-G12D/+;p53LSL-R172H KrasLSL-G12D/+;p53LSL-R270H KrasLSL-G12D/+;p5353/54,53/54 KrasLA2/+;p53LSL/LSL;Rosa26CreERT2 KrasLSL-G12D/+;p53ERTAM RbF19/F19;p53F2-10/F2-10 p53ﬂﬂl;Rb1ﬂ/ﬂ;Ptenﬂ/ﬂ Rb1ﬂ/ﬂ;p53ﬂ/ﬂ;Rbl2ﬂ/ﬂ Rb1ﬂ/ﬂ;p53ﬂ/ﬂ;MycLSL/LSL Rb1ﬂ/ﬂ;p53XTR/XTR;Rbl2ﬂ/ﬂ LOF effects in promoting Kras-initiated LUAD. Tissue-speciﬁc GOF effects in promoting sino-nasal adenocarcinomas LOF effects in promoting Kras-initiated LUAD. Tissue-speciﬁc GOF effects in promoting sino-nasal adenocarcinomas DNE in promoting sino-nasal adenocarcinomas Tumour suppression by p53 involves the repurposing of the role of p53 in tissue repair Restoration of WT p53 expression eliminates high-grade tumours Induces aggressive neuroendocrine lung tumours Exhibits variant characteristics of SCLC as well as large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma and NSCLC Shares similar features with the p53/Rbl1 double knockout mouse model. Reliably recapitulates the ASCL1-high/NEUROD1-low subtype of human SCLC Representative of the variant subtype of human SCLC. Displays a high level of plasticity Restoration of the expression of WT p53 limits the growth and metastasis of autochthonous SCLC with germline loss of p53 have shown similar results . However, as discussed above, most p53 mutations in human It was found that mutant p53 cancers are missense mutations. promotes disease progression of mutant Kras-driven lung tumours, and certain point mutations have been reported to contribute to tumorigenesis through DNE and/or GOF effects . A previous study comparing the conditional mutations of p53LSLR270H, p53LSL-R172H and the p53ﬂ/ﬂ allele in the KrasLSL-G12D/+ mouse model of LUAD revealed that while for all alterations the LOF effects were sufﬁcient to promote Kras-initiated LUAD and drive metastasis to regional lymph nodes and distant organ sites, such as kidney in a small number of mice, the transcriptional processes governed by p53 to elicit this metastatic phenotype is however poorly understood. Of note, p53R270H but not p53R172H also acted in a dominant-negative manner in promoting tumorigenesis when the other allele was WT for p53. Moreover, the expression of mutant p53 was found to contribute to tumour heterogeneity by promoting the development of sino-nasal adenocarcinomas, which was not observed in tumours with a p53-deﬁcient state . These Kras/p53 compound mutant mouse models recapitulate several characteristics of advanced human LUAD that are not commonly observed in the Kras-mutant/p53-deﬁcient mouse models. Despite all the discoveries made from studies using these mouse models, which demonstrate the importance of p53 in lung cancer, the mechanism by which p53 suppresses lung cancer development remains unclear. Recently, comparing the Kras-mutant LUAD mouse models with p53 knockout, WT p53 or hyperactive p53 alleles with enhanced tumour suppressor activity has revealed the role of p53 loss in the initiation and progression of LUAD. It was found that tumour suppression by p53 in this setting involves the repurposing of the role of p53 in tissue repair, whereby p53 promotes alveolar type 1 cell differentiation of transitional (i.e. early neoplastic) cancer cells. Inactivation of p53 leads to the inappropriate persistence of transitional cancer cells thereby promoting progression of LUAD (Table 1). Numerous GEMMs have been developed to study SCLC, with almost all of them containing conditional alleles of Rb1 (ﬂoxed exon Oncogene 19) and p53 (ﬂoxed exons 2–10). In these mice aggressive neuroendocrine lung tumours can be induced upon intra-nasal or intra-tracheal delivery of Adeno-Cre viruses . Additional deletion of Pten or Rbl2 and stabilisation/over-expression of MYC have been shown to further accelerate tumorigenesis and promote metastasis in these SCLC mouse models initiated by the loss of Rb1 and p53 . For example, the p53/Rbl1/Pten triple knockout mouse model exhibits variant characteristics of SCLC as well as large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma and NSCLC . Conversely, the p53/Rb1/ Rbl2 triple knockout mouse model shares similar features with the p53/Rb1 double knockout model, and they both reliably recapitulate the ASCL1-high/NEUROD1-low subtype of human SCLC . In contrast, the p53/Rb1 double knockout model with Cre-activated mutant MycT58A that leads to stabilised MYC proteins, is representative of the variant subtype of human SCLC . Tumour cells with this genotype display a high level of plasticity, with an ASCL1-high/ NEUROD1-low phenotype at early-stage disease and a NEUROD1high/ASCL1-low phenotype in invasive late-stage tumours (Table 1). These observations suggest a possible plasticity between ASCL1 and NEUROD1 tumour cell phenotypes and implicate MYC as a driver of this process. It was hypothesised that when WT p53 expression is introduced into tumour cells, the WT p53 proteins will be activated and stabilised due to stress stimuli, such as oncogene expression, hyperproliferative signals and DNA damage. This would then lead to activation of p53 target genes and the subsequent induction of apoptosis or senescence of tumour cells . This hypothesis has been tested in GEMMs of various cancers including lymphoma, lung cancer and liver carcinoma . In a WT p53 restorable mouse model of LUAD, the LSL-WT p53 allele in the mice is phenotypically identical to the knockout state of the allele, but the expression of WT p53 can be induced upon the removal of LSL by a CRE recombinase . Using this mouse model in concert with activation of oncogenic KrasG12D, it was found that the induced expression of WT p53 eliminates highgrade tumours but not low-grade adenoma lesions . Similar results were observed in other NSCLC mouse models containing LSLKrasG12D and p53ERTAM alleles, whereby p53 can be switched between the knockout and the WT state by tamoxifen administration . In 122 T. SCLC, the Rb1ﬂ/ﬂ;p53XTR/XTR;Rbl2ﬂ/ﬂ mouse model was used to assess the effects of p53 restoration on tumour expansion. In this model, WT p53 can be inactivated by a CRE recombinase and then restored by a FlpO recombinase. It was found that p53 restoration limited the growth and metastasis of autochthonous SCLC. Intertumoral heterogeneity was observed between SCLC tumour subtypes in response to the restoration of WT p53, such that this led to cell senescence in a subset of tumour cells but non-apoptotic cell death in other subsets of tumour cells (Table 1). Overall, GEMMs provide valuable insights into the molecular mechanisms driving cancer formation and development. Studies using the p53 restorable mouse models suggest that reactivation of WT p53 might be a promising therapeutic strategy for treating mutant p53-driven lung cancers. The use of GEMMs facilitates our understanding of lung cancer biology, as well as the development of new therapeutic interventions. THE PROGNOSTIC ROLE OF P53 MUTATIONS While p53 mutations are found in over half of NSCLC and over 75% of SCLC , the impact of p53 mutations on prognosis remains controversial and can vary between lung cancer subtypes and tumour stage. Several studies have shown that LUAD patients with p53 mutations have worse OS compared to patients with WT p53 lung cancers, whereas no signiﬁcant differences were observed in LUSC patients . Other studies focusing on tumour stage have reported that mutations in p53 are associated with worse OS in stage I NSCLC patients but not in stage II and stage III patients . Of note, the differences in therapeutic histories of patients and the small number of patients included in some of these studies could be confounding factors that led to contradictory results. In SCLC, it was found that p53 mutations provided tumour cells with a growth advantage in metastatic disease and growth in tissue cultivation . Consistent with this ﬁnding, other studies have reported that the proportion of tumours with mutant p53 is higher than those with WT p53 in late-stage SCLC patients . Furthermore, histological staining of mutant p53 proteins in over 100 SCLC tumour specimens revealed that the presence of mutant p53 is associated with poor patient survival, supporting the role of mutant p53 as a predictive marker of poor prognosis in SCLC . While most studies only distinguished between cancer patients with WT p53 versus mutant p53, the diverse spectrum of p53 mutations was found to correlate with the heterogeneous clinical outcomes. proposed to categorise p53 mutations according to their effects on protein function. They classiﬁed p53 mutations into two groups: disruptive mutations which can lead to the LOF of the mutant p53 proteins, and non-disruptive mutations which partially retain some functions of WT p53 and are reportedly often associated with DNE and alleged GOF effects of mutant p53 . Studies following these criteria have shown that non-disruptive p53 mutations are associated with signiﬁcantly shorter OS in advanced NSCLC patients, whereas p53 mutations, as a whole, showed no signiﬁcant correlation with OS. This may be explained by the possible DNE and GOF effects of non-disruptive mutant p53 proteins that lead to increased proliferation, metastasis and chemoresistance, whereas disruptive p53 mutations are unlikely to exert DNE and GOF effects . Different impacts of mutant p53 on patient outcome were also observed in other cancers, including head and neck cancer, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) and breast cancer . However, some recent studies provided evidence that for the sustained expansion of cancers, alleged GOF effects of mutant p53 proteins are not critical . IMMUNE AND METABOLIC MICROENVIRONMENTS IN P53 It is widely accepted that tumour progression is not only impacted by cell autonomous features but also by the TME. Mutant p53 proteins have been found to promote a pro-oncogenic TME by modulating the secretion of cytokines and chemokines by the tumour cells . In addition, p53 also plays an important role in anti-tumour innate and immunity through the regulation of adaptive immune proﬁles and/or the expression of immuneinhibitory checkpoint regulators by the cancer cells . CD4+ helper T cells, CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, NK cells and in certain cases, neutrophils contribute to immune surveillance of tumour cells , whereas other immune cells, such as regulatory T cells and certain myeloid cell subsets, were reported to suppress anti-tumour immune responses . Tumourassociated macrophages (TAMs) are a major component of the TME. Two main polarisations of TAMs include M1-like macrophages, which exhibit anti-tumour activities by stimulating the adaptive immune response and inﬂammation and, conversely, M2-like macrophages, which exhibit tumour promoting activities by suppressing the immune response in the TME . In lung cancer, TAMs are the most abundant immune cells present in the TME , and they were reported to promote the proliferation, epithelial–mesenchymal transition and metastasis of cancer cells, which results in poor patient outcomes . A signiﬁcant increase in TAMs was observed in NSCLC and other cancers in response to loss of p53 . NSCLC cells were found to facilitate the polarisation of TAMs towards the M2 phenotype in vitro . However, other studies showed an increase in M1-like macrophages in p53 mutant LUAD and LUSC patients . Furthermore, mutant p53 expressed in cancer cells has been reported to impact macrophage behaviour through its GOF effects thereby supporting tumour development . T cell-mediated killing of tumour cells is critical for anti-tumour immunity. The activity of T cells during an immune response is regulated by the expression of immune checkpoint regulators, such as PD-1 . Tumour cells exploit this pathway by upregulating the expression of ligands of these regulators, such as PD-L1, to dampen the immune response. The loss of p53 in malignant cells is correlated with increased expression of PD-L1 in cells of the TME in many cancers, It has been reported that p53 mutant lung cancer patients exhibited increased expression of immune checkpoint regulators, enhanced CD8 T cell inﬁltration and increased expression of effector T cell and interferon-γ associated genes . This may indicate the predictive value of mutant p53 for responses to ICB in lung cancer. Of note, there are also studies showing that in murine lung cancer models, p53-deﬁcient tumour cells downregulated antigen presentation by reducing the expression of MHC-I, consequently exhibiting poorer to ICB compared to WT p53 expressing tumours . Concordant observations were found in human lung cancer, where NSCLC patients with p53 truncating mutations had shorter OS with immunotherapy compared to patients with WT p53 expressing tumours . Further research is required to better understand the clinical predictive value of the different p53 mutations in lung cancer. including lung cancer . responses Metabolic reprogramming in the TME can result in signiﬁcant changes in the function and response of the immune system. Recently, it was reported that glucose metabolism is associated with the phenotype of certain immune cells, such as macrophages, dendritic cells and CD8+ T cells . In a study of 495 LUAD patients, genes involved in the glycolysis–gluconeogenesis metabolic pathways were shown to be correlated with p53 mutations . As a result of accelerated glycolysis in tumour cells, high levels of lactate are generated. The accumulation of lactate in the TME not only facilitates the progression and metastatic spread of tumour cells, but also exerts immune modulatory effects on tumour inﬁltrating immune cells. It was found that lactate suppresses the proliferation and cytokine production of cytotoxic T lymphocytes and thereby impairs their anti-tumour activity . Furthermore, tumour cell derived lactate was shown to inhibit the differentiation and activation of dendritic cells and the secretion of TNF by monocytes . High Oncogene T. 123 Fig. 4 Therapeutic strategies to target mutant p53 in cancer. A Promoting the degradation of mutant p53 proteins through proteasomal or autophagy pathways. B Restoring WT p53 function in mutant p53 proteins in cancer cells. C Inhibiting the interactions between mutant p53 and proteins that allegedly exert their GOF activities. D Inhibiting downstream signalling pathways that may be activated by mutant p53. contributes levels of lactate were also found to enhance the production of IL-23, a to tumour-associated inﬂammation cytokine that . Taken together, understanding the contributions of immune and metabolic parameters to tumour development is crucial for improving the predictive value and therapeutic strategies for p53 mutant lung cancers. TARGETING P53 FOR THE TREATMENT OF LUNG CANCER Many anti-cancer therapeutics kill cancer cells by inducing DNA damage which triggers WT p53-mediated apoptosis and/or cell cycle arrest/cell senescence. Accordingly, loss or mutation of p53 can contribute to the resistance of diverse tumour cells to cytotoxic drugs . It has been reported that mutant p53 protein can negatively impact the cytotoxic effects of cisplatin treatment for NSCLC via the upregulation of NRF2, a transcription factor that was reported to contribute to the resistance of malignant cells to several anti-cancer drugs . Furthermore, patients with WT p53 expressing lung cancers were observed to exhibit better responses to cisplatin-based therapies compared to patients with mutant p53 expressing lung cancers . Due to the high mutation rate of malignant cells with defects in the p53 pathway and the fact that mutant p53 proteins are only highly expressed in malignant tissues but absent in normal tissues, targeting mutant p53 itself has been proposed to be a promising strategy for improving the treatment of chemoand/or radio-resistant tumours. Considerable efforts have been expended to explore strategies to therapeutically target mutant p53 in cancer cells. These strategies include promoting the degradation of mutant p53 proteins through proteasomal or autophagy pathways (Fig. 4A), restoring WT p53 function in mutant p53 proteins in cancer cells (Fig. 4B), inhibiting the interactions between mutant p53 and proteins that allegedly exert their GOF activities (Fig. 4C) as well as inhibiting downstream signalling pathways that may be activated by mutant p53 (Fig. 4D). However, as stated above, recent studies have provided compelling evidence that removal of mutant p53 proteins had no impact on tumour expansion, Oncogene 124 T. metastasis and response to anti-cancer agents . This demonstrates that any strategies aimed at removing or modulating mutant p53 proteins are unlikely to have therapeutic impact. Many compounds have been developed to convert the mutant p53 protein into a WT p53 conformation, thereby restoring some WT p53 functions. For instance, PhiKan083 and PK7088 speciﬁcally target the mutant p53Y220C protein by stabilising its structure, thereby increasing the levels of p53Y220C proteins with WT conformation and activity . Other compounds targeting various mutant p53 proteins include PRIMA-1 and its methylated derivative APR-246, SCH29074 and CP-31398, which are thought to be able to restore WT TP53 function by promoting the proper folding of the mutant p53 protein . Among all these compounds, APR-246 has been shown to effectively induce apoptosis in SCLC cell lines . Furthermore, synergistic effects of APR-246 with cisplatin treatment were observed in both NSCLC and SCLC cell lines , indicating its therapeutic potential in clinical settings. Importantly, although individual mutations and their associated GOF effects can result in variable therapeutic vulnerabilities, the restoration of WT p53 function exerts comparable effects across tumours with different mutant p53 in lung cancer mouse models that can be switched from mutant p53 to WT p53 . However, of note, recent studies have revealed that APR-246 does not actually kill malignant cells by targeting mutant p53 since CRISPR mediated removal of mutant p53 had no impact on sensitivity to this agent in a broad range of cancer cell lines . The restoration of WT p53 function has the potential to improve the treatment outcome of lung cancer patients to standard therapy by enhancing the response of tumour cells to DNA damage-inducing agents . However, studies using mouse models suggest targeting mutant p53 might only be beneﬁcial to patients with late-stage lung cancer, as mutant p53 proteins are only adequately activated in advanced tumours . Regardless, these ﬁndings provide valuable insights in the therapeutic impact of restoration of WT p53 function in lung cancer. that tumour suppressor that protects cells from p53 is a crucial malignant transformation by activating a range of cellular responses, including apoptosis, adaptation of cellular metabolism, cell cycle arrest, cell senescence and DNA damage repair. p53 is the most frequently mutated gene in human cancers and its mutations are associated with poor patient outcomes, although there is some controversy in lung cancer. Despite decades of research, the exact mechanisms by which mutant p53 proteins promote the initiation and sustained expansion of cancer remains a topic of extensive debate. Furthermore, the interplay between mutant p53 and other oncogenic drivers and the impact of comutations on the development and therapeutic responses of lung cancer are unclear. The development of GEMMs has allowed for insights into the biology of p53 mutant cancers, as they reliably mimic the oncogenic mutations underpinning cancer formation in humans and hence enable the study of the impact of speciﬁc oncogenic driver events. Although immunotherapy has achieved remarkable breakthrough in lung cancer treatment, patients with mutant p53 expressing lung cancers only show limited responses to immunotherapies. This highlights the urgent need for novel therapeutic approaches to enhance the efﬁcacy of immunotherapies. p53 mutations often confer resistance to many anti-cancer agents that induce DNA damage. Therefore, exploring strategies that speciﬁcally target mutant p53 are of great importance for improving the clinical outcomes for these cancer patients. Moreover, p53 mutant lung cancers exhibit high levels to of molecular and clinical heterogeneity, which leads heterogeneous clinical outcomes. Therefore, characterisation of the impacts of different p53 mutant proteins is essential for improving the prognostic and predictive values of mutant p53 for treatment response, as well as for the development of personalised treatments for patients with p53 mutant lung cancers. Overall, p53 mutations remain an ongoing challenge in understanding the development of cancer as well as cancer therapy. Further research is required to address these pressing issues and advance our understanding of the many functions of WT p53 in tumour suppression and the impact of the different p53 mutant proteins in lung cancer. 1. Strasser A. How does p53 induce apoptosis and how does this relate to p53-mediated tumour suppression? Cell Death Differ. 2018;. 2. Vousden KH, Prives C. Blinded by the light: the growing complexity of p53. Cell. 2009;. 3. Torres M. Myc-driven endogenous cell competition in the early mammalian embryo. Nature. 2013;. 4. Golstein P. Cell death in us and others. Science. 1998;. 5. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011;. 6. Adams JM. Control of apoptosis by the BCL-2 protein family: implications for physiology and therapy. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014;. 7. Strasser A, Vaux DL. Cell death in the origin and treatment of cancer. Mol Cell. 2020;. 8. et al. p53and drug-induced apoptotic responses mediated by BH3-only proteins puma and noxa. Science. 2003;. 9. et al. Puma is an essential mediator of p53-dependent and -independent apoptotic pathways. Cancer Cell. 2003;. 10. Strasser A. Emerging connectivity of programmed cell implications. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. death pathways and its physiological 2020;. 11. Li-Weber M, et al. p53 activates the CD95 (APO-1/Fas) gene in response to DNA damage by anticancer drugs. J Exp Med. 1998;. 12. Munsch D, Watanabe-Yonish-Rouach E, et al. Human and mouse Fas (APO-1/CD95) death receptor genes each contain a p53-responsive element that is activated by p53 mutants unable to induce apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 2000;. 13. Takimoto R, El-Deiry WS. Wild-type p53 transactivates the KILLER/DR5 gene site. Oncogene. sequence-speciﬁc DNA-binding intronic through 2000;. an 14. Sax JK, El-Deiry WS. Identiﬁcation and characterization of the cytoplasmic protein TRAF4 as a p53-regulated proapoptotic gene. J Biol Chem. 2003;. 15. et al. DRAGO (KIAA0247), a new DNA damage-responsive, p53-inducible gene that cooperates with p53 as oncosuppressor. [Corrected]. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106:dju053. 16. et al. Regulation of apoptosis by p53-inducible transmembrane protein containing sushi domain. Oncol Rep. 2010;. 17. Strasser A. A dominant interfering mutant of FADD/MORT1 enhances deletion of autoreactive thymocytes and inhibits proliferation of mature T lymphocytes. EMBO J. 1998;. 18. Yonish-Oren M. Wild-type p53 induces apoptosis of myeloid leukaemic cells that is inhibited by interleukin-6. Nature. 1991;. 19. Cory S. DNA damage can induce apoptosis in proliferating lymphoid cells via p53-independent mechanisms inhibitable by Bcl-2. Cell. 1994;. 20. Jacks T. p53 is required for radiation-induced apoptosis in mouse thymocytes. Nature. 1993;. 21. et al. Thymocyte apoptosis induced by p53-dependent and independent pathways. Nature. 1993;. 22. et al. BH3only proteins Puma and Bim are rate-limiting for gamma-radiationand glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis Blood. of 2005;. lymphoid cells vivo. in Oncogene 23. et al. Puma and to a lesser extent Noxa are suppressors of Myc-induced lymphomagenesis. Cell Death Differ. 2009;. 24. Hanahan D. Hallmarks of cancer: new dimensions. Cancer Discov. 2022;. 25. Ruﬁni A, Melino G. Senescence and aging: the critical roles of p53. Oncogene. 2013;. 26. Birch J, Gil J. Senescence and the SASP: many therapeutic avenues. Genes Dev. 2020;. 27. Stewart SA. Unmasking senescence: context-dependent effects of SASP in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2019;. 28. et al. Cellular senescence: deﬁning a path forward. Cell. 2019;. 29. Qian Y, Chen X. Senescence regulation by the p53 protein family. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;. 30. McLowe SW. Oncogenic ras provokes premature cell senescence associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. Cell. 1997;. 31. Kirkwood TBL. On the evolution of cellular senescence. Aging Cell. 2020;19:e13270. 32. Demaria M. Senescent cells in cancer therapy: friends or foes? Trends Cancer. 2020;. 33. et al. Naturally Nature. p16Ink4a-positive lifespan. shorten healthy cells occurring 2016;. 34. He S, Sharpless NE. Senescence in health and disease. Cell. 2017;. 35. Puisieux A. Cellular plasticity: a route to senescence exit and tumorigenesis. Cancers. 2021;. 36. McArthur MJ, Montgomery CA Jr., Butel JS, et al. Mice deﬁcient for p53 are developmentally normal but susceptible to spontaneous tumours. Nature. 1992;. 37. Pinon-et al. p53 efﬁciently suppresses tumor development in the complete absence of its cellcycle inhibitory and proapoptotic effectors p21, Puma, and Noxa. Cell Rep. 2013;. 38. et al. Tumor suppression in the absence of p53-mediated cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis, and senescence. Cell. 2012;. 39. Cheng Y. DNA repair pathways in cancer therapy and resistance. Front Pharmacol. 2020;11:629266. 40. et al. Mechanism and regulation of DNA damage recognition in nucleotide excision repair. Genes Environ. 2019;. 41. Casal-Mourino A, Ruano-Ravina A, Torres-Duran M, Parente-Lamelas I, Provencio-Pulla M, Castro-Anon O, et al. Polymorphisms in the BER and NER pathways and their inﬂuence on survival and toxicity in never-smokers with lung cancer. Sci Rep. 2020;. 42. Williams AB, Schumacher B. p53 in the DNA-damage-repair process. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2016;6:a026070. 43. O’Connor PM, Fornace AJ Jr. Involvement of the p53 in repair of u.v.-type DNA damage. Oncogene. suppressor tumor 1995;. T. 125 52. et al. p53 interacts with hRAD51 and hRAD54, and directly modulates homologous recombination. Cancer Res. 2003;. 53. et al. DNA-PK, ATM and ATR collaboratively regulate p53-RPA interaction to facilitate homologous recombination DNA repair. Oncogene. 2013;. 54. et al. DNA ligase IV deﬁciency in mice leads to defective neurogenesis and embryonic lethality via the p53 pathway. Mol Cell. 2000;. 55. et al. A critical role for DNA and neurogenesis. Cell. in both lymphogenesis end-joining proteins 1998;. 56. et al. Interplay of p53 and DNA-repair protein XRCC4 in tumorigenesis, genomic stability and development. Nature. 2000;. 57. Urgel-et al. The TP53activated E3 ligase RNF144B is a tumour suppressor that prevents genomic instability. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2024;. 58. Wakeﬁeld MJ, et al. DNA repair processes are critical mediators of p53-dependent tumor suppression. Nat Med. 2018;. 59. Liu Y, Gu W. The complexity of p53-mediated metabolic regulation in tumor suppression. Semin Cancer Biol. 2022;. 60. Feng Z. Tumor suppressor p53 and metabolism. J Mol Cell Biol. 2019;. 61. Vousden KH, Ryan KM. p53 and metabolism. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009;. 62. Schwartzenberg-Bar-Karnieli E. The tumor suppressor p53 down-regulates glucose transporters GLUT1 and GLUT4 gene expression. Cancer Res. 2004;. 63. Tanaka N. p53 regulates glucose metabolism through an IKK-NF-kappaB pathway and inhibits cell transformation. Nat Cell Biol. 2008;. 64. et al. Tumor suppressor p53 negatively regulates glycolysis stimulated by hypoxia through its target RRAD. Oncotarget. 2014;. 65. et al. TIGAR, a p53-inducible regulator of glycolysis and apoptosis. Cell. 2006;. 66. et al. TIGAR is required for efﬁcient intestinal regeneration and tumorigenesis. Dev Cell. 2013;. 67. Feng Z, Levine AJ. The regulation of energy metabolism and the IGF-1/mTOR pathways by the p53 protein. Trends Cell Biol. 2010;. 68. Mak TW. Regulation of cancer cell metabolism. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011;. 69. Ward PS, Thompson CB. Metabolic reprogramming: a cancer hallmark even Warburg did not anticipate. Cancer Cell. 2012;. 70. Negelein E. The metabolism of tumors in the body. J Gen Physiol. 1927;. 71. Mahdi AA. Regulation of glucose metabolism by p53: emerging new roles for the tumor suppressor. Oncotarget. 2011;. 72. Wang YP, Lei QY. Metabolite sensing and signaling in cell metabolism. Signal 44. Prives C. Ref-1 regulates the transactivation and proTransduct Target Ther. 2018;. apoptotic functions of p53 in vivo. EMBO J. 1999;. 45. Prives C. Identiﬁcation of redox/repair protein Ref-1 as a potent activator of p53. Genes Dev. 1997;. 46. Deppert W. Redox factor 1 (Ref-1) enhances speciﬁc DNA binding of p53 by promoting p53 tetramerization. Oncogene. 2005;. 47. et al. Regulation of the human AP-endonuclease (APE1/Ref-1) expression by the tumor suppressor p53 in response to DNA damage. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008;. 48. Sturzbecher HW. Characterisation of the promoter region of the human DNA-repair gene Rad51. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2005;. 49. Arias-Lopez C, Lazaro-et al. p53 modulates homologous recombination by transcriptional regulation of the RAD51 gene. EMBO Rep. 2006;. 50. et al. Adenoviral vector driven by a minimal Rad51 promoter is selective for p53-deﬁcient tumor cells. PLoS ONE. 2011;6:e28714. 51. Lopez BS. Mutant p53 proteins stimulate spontaneous and radiation-induced intrachromosomal homologous recombination independently of the alteration of the transactivation activity and of the G1 checkpoint. Oncogene. 1999;. Oncogene 73. Saxton RA, Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling in growth, metabolism, and disease. Cell. 2017;. 74. Mihaylova MM, Shaw RJ. The AMPK signalling pathway coordinates cell growth, autophagy and metabolism. Nat Cell Biol. 2011;. 75. Yorimitsu T, Klionsky DJ. Autophagy: molecular machinery for self-eating. Cell Death Differ. 2005;. 76. Del Sal G. The cytoplasmic side of p53’s oncosuppressive activities. FEBS Lett. 2014;. 77. Ryan KM. DRAM links autophagy to p53 and programmed cell death. Autophagy. 2007;. 78. et al. Stabilization and activation of p53 downregulates mTOR signaling through AMPK in mantle cell lymphoma. Leukemia. 2009;. 79. Menck CF. Three-dimensional microenvironment confers enhanced sensitivity to doxorubicin by reducing p53-dependent induction of autophagy. Oncogene. 2015;. 80. et al. Mutant p53 autophagy. Cell Cycle. cytoplasm inhibits protein localized in the 2008;. 81. Nadal-Serrano M, et al. Mutant p53 proteins counteract autophagic mechanism sensitizing cancer cells to mTOR inhibition. Mol Oncol. 2016;. 126 T. 82. Vousden KH, Lane DP. p53 in health and disease. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 108. AACR Project GENIE. Powering precision medicine through an international 2007;. consortium. Cancer Discov. 2017;. 83. Mcet al. LiFraumeni syndrome: cancer risk assessment and clinical management. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014;. 109. Tsao MS, Aviel-et al. Prognostic and predictive importance of p53 and RAS for adjuvant chemotherapy in non smallcell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;. 84. et al. TP53 variations in human cancers: new lessons from the IARC TP53 database and genomics data. Hum Mutat. 2016;. 110. Lee H. Potential increase in the prognostic value of p53 mutation by Pro72 allele in stage I non-small-cell lung cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009;. 85. et al. Mutant TRP53 exerts a target gene-selective dominant-negative effect to drive tumor development. Genes Dev. 2018;. 111. Yokota J. Comprehensive analysis of p53 gene mutation characteristics in lung carcinoma with special reference to histological subtypes. Int J Oncol. 1999;. 86. et al. The TP53 website: an integrative resource centre for the TP53 mutation database and TP53 mutant analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41:D962–969. 87. Chan CS. Why are there hotspot in the TP53 gene in human cancers? Cell Death Differ. mutations 2018;. 88. Freed-Pastor WA, Prives C. Mutant p53: one name, many proteins. Genes Dev. 2012;. 89. et al. The differential effects of mutant p53 alleles on advanced murine lung cancer. Cancer Res. 2005;. 90. Fridman JS, Lowe SW. Control of apoptosis by p53. Oncogene. 2003;. 91. et al. Gain of function mutations in p53. Nat Genet. 1993;. 92. Sansom OJ. p53 mutation and loss have different effects on tumourigenesis in a novel mouse model of pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma. J Pathol. 2010;. 93. et al. Gain of function of a p53 hot spot mutation in a mouse model of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Cell. 2004;. 94. et al. Mutant p53 drives metastasis and overcomes growth arrest/senescence in pancreatic cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010;. 95. et al. Mutant p53 function in two mouse models of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Cell. gain of 2004;. 96. Baert-et al. Molecular basis of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome: an update from the French LFS families. J Med Genet. 2008;. 97. Rotter V. Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene: important milestones at the various steps of tumorigenesis. Genes Cancer. 2011;. 98. Jemal A. Global cancer statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2018;. 99. Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Comprehensive molecular proﬁling of lung adenocarcinoma. Nature. 2014;. 100. et al. The 2015 World Health Organization classiﬁcation of lung tumors: impact of genetic, clinical and radiologic advances since the 2004 classiﬁcation. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;. 112. Mcet al. p53 mutations and survival in stage I non-small-cell lung cancer: results of a prospective study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;. 113. Saleh MM, Schefﬂer M, Merkelbach-et al. Comprehensive analysis of TP53 and KEAP1 mutations and their impact on survival in localizedand advanced-stage NSCLC. J Thorac Oncol. 2022;. 114. Cheng H. Update 2020: management of non-small cell lung cancer. Lung. 2020;. 115. Rami-et al. The IASLC lung cancer staging project: proposals for revision of the TNM stage groupings in the forthcoming (eighth) edition of the TNM classiﬁcation for lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;. 116. et al. Lung adjuvant cisplatin evaluation: a pooled analysis by the LACE Collaborative Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008;. 117. Reck M, Rodriguez-et al. Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy for PD-L1-positive non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;. 118. Fang B. lung cancers: biomarkers for predicting responses and strategies to overcome resistance. BMC Cancer. 2018;. Immunotherapy for non-small cell 119. et al. KRAS(G12C) J Med. inhibition with sotorasib in advanced solid tumors. N Engl 2020;. 120. et al. Sotorasib for lung cancers with KRAS p.G12C mutation. N Engl J Med. 2021;. 121. et al. Adagrasib in non-small-cell lung cancer harboring a KRAS(G12C) mutation. N Engl J Med. 2022;. 122. et al. Identiﬁcation of the clinical development candidate MRTX849, a covalent KRAS(G12C) inhibitor for the treatment of cancer. J Med Chem. 2020;. 123. Kraut N. Expanding the reach of precision oncology by drugging All KRAS mutants. Cancer Discov. 2022;. 124. et al. BI-3406, a potent and selective SOS1-KRAS interaction inhibitor, is effective in KRAS-driven cancers through combined MEK inhibition. Cancer Discov. 2021;. 125. Lito P. Suppressing nucleotide exchange to inhibit KRAS-mutant tumors. Cancer Discov. 2021;. 101. Skoulidis F, Heymach JV. Co-occurring genomic alterations in non-small-cell 126. Faivre-Finn C, Sage J. Small-cell lung cancer. Nat Rev Dis lung cancer biology and therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2019;. Prim. 2021;. 102. Moreira AL. KRAS mutations are associated with solid growth pattern and tumor-inﬁltrating leukocytes in lung adenocarcinoma. Mod Pathol. 2013;. et al. Effect of implications for signaling KRAS oncogene substitutions on protein behavior: and clinical outcome. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;. 103. 104. Paz-Ares L, Schmid-Bindert G. KRASlung cancer: from biology to therapy. Lung Cancer. mutant non-small cell 2018;. 105. et al. Prognostic value of speciﬁc KRAS mutations in lung adenocarcinomas. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev. 1997;. 106. et al. Differences in mutation spectrum in lung cancer cases between African Americans and Caucasians after occupational or environmental exposure to known carcinogens. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev. 2002;. 107. et al. Cooccurring genomic alterations deﬁne major subsets of KRAS-mutant lung adenocarcinoma with distinct biology, immune proﬁles, and therapeutic vulnerabilities. Cancer Discov. 2015;. 127. Parkin DM. International lung cancer trends by histologic type: male:female differences diminishing and adenocarcinoma rates rising. Int J Cancer. 2005;. 128. et al. Molecular subtypes of small cell lung cancer: a synthesis of human and mouse model data. Nat Rev Cancer. 2019;. 129. et al. ASCL1 and NEUROD1 reveal heterogeneity in pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors and regulate distinct genetic programs. Cell Rep. 2016;. 130. et al. POU2F3 is a master lung cancer. Genes Dev. regulator of a tuft cell-like variant of small cell 2018;. 131. Nagase T. YAP and TAZ modulate cell phenotype in a subset of small cell lung cancer. Cancer Sci. 2016;. 132. et al. Patterns of transcription factor programs and immune pathway activation deﬁne four major subtypes of SCLC with distinct therapeutic vulnerabilities. Cancer Cell. 2021;.e347. 133. et al. p53 mutations in human lung tumors. Cancer Res. 1992;. Oncogene 134. et al. The p53 lung cancer with a distinct gene is very frequently mutated in small-cell nucleotide substitution pattern. Oncogene. 1991;. 135. Kaye FJ. RB and cyclin dependent kinase pathways: deﬁning a distinction between RB and p16 loss in lung cancer. Oncogene. 2002;. 136. Minna JD. Molecular genetics of small cell lung carcinoma. Semin Oncol. 2001;. 137. Komaki RU. Progress in the management of limited-stage small cell lung cancer. Cancer. 2014;. 138. De Ruysscher D, Pijls-Lutgens L, et al. Time between the ﬁrst day of chemotherapy and the last day of chest radiation is the most important predictor of survival in limited-disease small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;. 139. Horn L, Mansﬁeld AS, et al. First-line atezolizumab plus chemotherapy in extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2018;. 140. Paz-et al. Durvalumab plus platinum-etoposide versus platinum-etoposide in ﬁrst-line treatment of extensive-stage small-cell (CASPIAN): a randomised, controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2019;. lung cancer 141. et al. Pembrolizumab or placebo plus etoposide and platinum as ﬁrst-line therapy for extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer: randomized, double-blind, phase III KEYNOTE-604 study. J Clin Oncol. 2020;. 142. et al. Analysis lung tumor initiation and progression using conditional expression of of oncogenic K-ras. Genes Dev. 2001;. 143. et al. Somatic activation of the K-ras oncogene causes early onset lung cancer in mice. Nature. 2001;. 144. et al. p53 governs an AT1 differentiation programme in lung cancer suppression. Nature. 2023;. 145. Berns A. Induction of lung cancer by somatic inactivation of both Trp53 and Rb1 in a small cell conditional mouse model. Cancer Cell. 2003;. 146. McTaylor-et al. Genetic and clonal dissection of murine small cell lung carcinoma progression by genome sequencing. Cell. 2014;. T. 127 160. Sioris T, Husgafvel-et al. Survival in operable non-small-cell lung cancer: role of p53 mutations, tobacco smoking and asbestos exposure. Int J Cancer. 2000;. 161. et al. Geﬁtinib versus cisplatin plus docetaxel in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer harbouring mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor (WJTOG3405): an open label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2010;. 162. et al. Role of p53 as a prognostic factor for survival in lung cancer: a systematic review of the literature with a meta-analysis. Eur Respir J. 2001;. 163. et al. Alterations of the p53 gene are common and critical events for the maintenance of malignant phenotypes in small-cell lung carcinoma. Oncogene. 1992;. 164. Hoﬂer H. Mutational spectrum of lung cancer and relationship to clinthe p53 gene in human small-cell icopathological data. Am J Pathol. 1993;. 165. Harada M. detection of mutant p53 protein in small-cell treatment outcome. Lung Cancer. 2000;. Immunohistochemical lung cancer: relationship to 166. et al. TP53 mutations and survival in squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med. 2007;. 167. Molina-Vila MA, Bertran-Mayo-de-las-Casas C, SanchezRonco M, Pujantell-Pastor L, et al. Nondisruptive p53 mutations are associated with shorter survival in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;. 168. et al. Missense mutations located in structural p53 DNA-binding motifs are associated with extremely poor survival in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2011;. 169. Lizard-Nacol S. Only missense mutations affecting the DNA binding domain of p53 inﬂuence outcomes in patients with breast carcinoma. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e55103. 170. et al. Loss-offunction but not gain-of-function properties of mutant TP53 are critical for the proliferation, survival, and metastasis of a broad range of cancer cells. Cancer Discov. 2024;. 147. et al. Loss of p130 accelerates tumor development in a mouse model for human small-cell lung carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2010;. 171. Mcet al. A dominant-negative effect drives selection of TP53 missense mutations in myeloid malignancies. Science. 2019;. 148. et al. MYC drives progression of small cell lung cancer to a variant neuroendocrine subtype with vulnerability to aurora kinase inhibition. Cancer Cell. 2017;. 149. Minna JD. Ampliﬁcation and expression of the c-myc oncogene in human lung cancer cell lines. Nature. 1983;. 150. Jackson JG, Lozano G. The mutant p53 mouse as a pre-clinical model. Oncogene. 2013;. 151. Mcet al. regression in vivo. Nature. Restoration of p53 function leads to tumour 2007;. 152. et al. Senescence and tumour clearance is triggered by p53 restoration in murine liver carcinomas. Nature. 2007;. 153. Martins CP, Brown-Swigart L, Evan GI. Modeling the therapeutic efﬁcacy of p53 restoration in tumors. Cell. 2006;. 172. et al. Cell of origin inﬂuences pancreatic cancer subtype. Cancer Discov. 2021;. 173. Vousden KH. p53, cancer and the immune response. J Cell Sci. 2020;133:jcs237453. 174. Biton J, Mansuet-et al. TP53, STK11, and EGFR mutations predict tumor immune proﬁle and the response to AntiPD-1 in lung adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2018;. 175. Pascual M, Mena-Garcia-HervasStubbs S, et al. PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint and p53 loss facilitate tumor progression in activated B-cell diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Blood. 2019;. 176. et al. Regulation of cutaneous malignancy by gammadelta T cells. Science. 2001;. 177. et al. Neutrophils driving unconventional T cells mediate resistance against murine sarcomas and selected human tumors. Cell. 2019;.e324. 154. et al. Selective activation of p53-mediated tumour suppression in high-grade tumours. Nature. 2010;. 178. et al. IFNgamma and lymphocytes prevent primary tumour development and shape tumour immunogenicity. Nature. 2001;. 155. Sanchez-Soto-et al. Mitochondrial apoptotic priming is a key determinant of cell fate upon p53 restoration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2021;118:e2019740118. 156. et al. Stage-speciﬁc sensitivity to p53 restoration during lung cancer progression. Nature. 2010;. 157. et al. p53 restoration in small cell lung cancer identiﬁes a latent cyclophilin-dependent necrosis mechanism. Nat Commun. 2023;. 158. et al. p53 mutations in deﬁned structural and functional domains are related to poor clinical outcome in non-small cell lung cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;. 159. et al. Alcohol consumption and cigarette smoking increase the frequency of p53 mutations in non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Res. 2000;. Oncogene 179. et al. Differential tumor surveillance by natural killer (NK) and NKT cells. J Exp Med. 2000;. 180. Litchﬁeld K, et al. Fc effector function contributes to the activity of human anti-CTLA-4 antibodies. Cancer Cell. 2018;.e644. 181. DiTedder TF. B cells are required for optimal CD4+ and CD8+ T cell tumor immunity: therapeutic B cell depletion enhances B16 melanoma growth in mice. J Immunol. 2010;. 182. Nishikawa H. Regulatory T cells in cancer immunosuptherapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. for anticancer implications pression - 2019;. 183. et al. Tumor-associated macrophages in human breast, colorectal, lung, ovarian and prostate cancers. Front Oncol. 2020;10:566511. 128 T. 184. Baba T. Lung macrophages: multifunctional regulator cells for metastatic cells. Int J Mol Sci. 2018;. 185. et al. M2 macrophages promote NSCLC metastasis by upregulating CRYAB. Cell Death Dis. 2019;. 186. Argyle D, Kitamura T. Targeting macrophage-recruiting chemokines as a novel therapeutic strategy to prevent the progression of solid tumors. Front Immunol. 2018;. 187. et al. Cancerspeciﬁc loss of p53 leads to a modulation of myeloid and T cell responses. Cell Rep. 2020;.e486. 188. Wang A. Identiﬁcation and validation of a metabolismrelated model and associated with tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes in p53 mutant lung adenocarcinoma patients. Ann Transl Med. 2021;. 189. et al. A TP53-associated gene signature for prediction of prognosis and therapeutic responses in lung squamous cell carcinoma. Oncoimmunology. 2020;9:1731943. 190. et al. Mutant p53 cancers reprogram macrophages to tumor supporting macrophages via exosomal miR-1246. Nat Commun. 2018;. 191. Ribas A, Wolchok JD. Cancer immunotherapy using checkpoint blockade. Science. 2018;. 192. Honjo T. Current issues and perspectives in PD-1 blockade cancer immunotherapy. Int J Clin Oncol. 2020;. 193. et al. PDL1 Regulation by p53 via miR-34. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2016;108:djv303. 194. et al. Potential predictive value of TP53 and KRAS mutation status for response to PD-1 blockade immunotherapy in lung adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2017;. 195. Eglenen-Polat B, et al. Loss of p53 and mutational heterogeneity drives immune resistance in an autochthonous mouse lung cancer model with high tumor mutational burden. Cancer Cell. 2023;.e1738. 196. Guo W. TP53 somatic mutations are associated with poor survival in non-small cell lung cancer patients who undergo immunotherapy. Aging. 2020;. 197. et al. Succinate dehydrogenase supports metabolic repurposing of mitochondria to drive inﬂammatory macrophages. Cell. 2016;.e413. 198. et al. TLR-driven early glycolytic reprogramming via the kinases TBK1-IKKvarepsilon supports the anabolic demands of dendritic cell activation. Nat Immunol. 2014;. 199. et al. Rapid effector function of memory CD8+ T cells requires an immediate-early glycolytic switch. Nat Immunol. 2013;. 200. Feder-et al. Multiple mechanisms underlie defective recognition of melanoma cells cultured in three-dimensional architectures by antigen-speciﬁc cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Br J Cancer. 2007;. 201. Gottfried E, Kunz-Mueller-et al. Tumor-derived lactic acid modulates dendritic cell activation and antigen expression. Blood. 2006;. 202. et al. Lactic acid and acidiﬁcation inhibit TNF secretion and glycolysis of human monocytes. J Immunol. 2010;. 203. et al. Tumorsecreted lactic acid promotes IL-23/IL-17 proinﬂammatory pathway. J Immunol. 2008;. 204. et al. IL-23 promotes tumour incidence and growth. Nature. 2006;. 205. et al. Mutant p53 confers lung cancer by upregulating Nrf2. Oncochemoresistance in non-small cell target. 2015;. 206. et al. Signiﬁcance of TP53 mutations as predictive markers of adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy in completely resected non-small-cell lung cancer. Mol Oncol. 2014;. 207. Zochbauer-et al. Growing clinical evidence for the interaction of the p53 genotype and response to induction chemotherapy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;. 208. Muller PA, Vousden KH. Mutant p53 in cancer: new functions and therapeutic opportunities. Cancer Cell. 2014;. 209. Fersht AR. Targeted rescue of a destabilized mutant of p53 by an in silico screened drug. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;. 210. et al. Small molecule induced reactivation of mutant p53 in cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;. 211. et al. Restoration of the tumor suppressor function to mutant p53 by a lowmolecular-weight compound. Nat Med. 2002;. 212. Rastinejad F. Pharmacological rescue of mutant p53 conformation and function. Science. 1999;. 213. et al. SCH529074, a small molecule activator of mutant p53, which binds p53 DNA binding domain (DBD), restores growth-suppressive function to mutant p53 and interrupts HDM2mediated ubiquitination of wild type p53. J Biol Chem. 2010;. 214. Poulsen HS. PRIMA-1Met/APR-246 induces apoptosis and tumor growth delay in small cell lung cancer expressing mutant p53. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;. 215. et al. PRIMA1(MET) synergizes with cisplatin to induce tumor cell apoptosis. Oncogene. 2005;. 216. et al. APR-246 overcomes resistance to cisplatin and doxorubicin in ovarian cancer cells. Cell Death Dis. 2015;6:e1794. 217. et al. Lung tumors with distinct p53 mutations respond similarly to p53 targeted therapy but exhibit genotype-speciﬁc statin sensitivity. Genes Dev. 2017;. 218. et al. The anti-cancer agent APR246 can activate several programmed cell death processes to kill malignant cells. Cell Death Differ. 2023;. 219. The GENIE BPC NSCLC Cohort: a real-world repository integrating standardized clinical and genomic data for 1846 patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2023;. 220. Chen Y. Targeting p53 pathways: mechanisms, structures, and advances in therapy. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2023;. 221. Brennan P. drawProteins: a Bioconductor/R package for reproducible and programmatic generation of protein schematics. F1000Res. 2018;. (NHMRC) The authors thank Peter Maltezos for his expertise in preparing the ﬁgures. This study was supported by fellowships and grants from the Australian Health and (Programme Grant GNT1113133 to AS, Medical Research Council Research Fellowship GNT1116937 to AS, Ideas Grants GNT2002618 and GNT2001201 to GLK, Synergy Grants GNT 2011139 to GLK and GNT2010275 to OK, AS and KDS). GLK is supported by a Victorian Cancer Agency Mid-Career Fellowship. Research support was also provided by the estate of Antony (Toni) Redstone OAM (to AS and GLK), the Craig Perkins Cancer Research Foundation (to GLK), the Dyson Bequest (to GLK), the Harry Secomb Foundation (to GLK) and the Julie and Peter Alston bequest (to KDS). TC is the recipient of the Research Training Scholarship, The University of Melbourne. This work was made possible through Victorian State Government Operational Infrastructure Support (OIS) and Australian Government NHMRC Independent Research Institute Infrastructure Support (IRIIS) Scheme. TC, LMA, OK, AS, GK and KDS wrote the manuscript; TC and LMA prepared the ﬁgures. The authors declare no competing interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Andreas Strasser, Gemma Kelly or Kate D. Sutherland. Reprints and permission information is available at Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. Oncogene T. 129 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of licence, visit http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. this © The Author(s) 2024 Oncogene