Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) has recently been redefined as a ‘spectrum’ cancer predisposition disorder to reflect its broad phenotypic heterogeneity. This variability is thought to stem in part from the diverse functional impacts of TP53 variants, although the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood and there is an unmet clinical need for effective risk stratification. Here, we apply unsupervised clustering to functional datasets and identify distinct TP53 variant groups with clinical relevance, including a monomeric subgroup enriched in osteosarcoma cases. In cellular validation assays, dermal fibro-blasts from carriers of more functionally impaired variants exhibit increased metabolic growth rates, mirroring trends observed in cluster-stratified clinical outcomes. These findings demonstrate the feasibility of developing diagnostic assays to guide personalized cancer risk assessment. More broadly, our results show that nuances in TP53 dysfunction shape the germline TP53-related cancer susceptibility spectrum and provide a framework for functionally delineating variant carriers.
Inherited cancer susceptibility in Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS; MIM #151623) was first described in 1969 based on the observation of several families with a high incidence of rare and diverse cancer types1. Since this initial observation, germline TP53 variants were identified as the underlying cause of LFS2,3 and the clinical classification has been adapted by multiple revised sets of criteria4–7 to incorporate individuals who do not fit the strict ‘classic LFS’ diagnosis8. Recently, LFS was reclassified as a ‘spectrum’ of disease rather than a syndrome to reflect the heterogeneity that has become increasingly evident through genotype-phenotype association studies9. The LFS spectrum encom-passes a highly variable age-of-onset with nearly 30% affected during childhood, largely unpredictable sites of tumor manifestation, and inconsistent cancer penetrance. To date, the factors causing this het-erogeneity in LFS remain unclear, although unequal TP53 variant functional consequences have been linked to different cancer phenotypes10–12. Increased use of DNA sequencing in the clinic has led to the discovery of hundreds of germline variants that span the entire TP53 gene. Missense mutations leading to single amino acid changes represent the vast majority of TP53 variants that are associated with LFS. There are thousands of possible single amino acid substitutions in TP53, and currently, at least 1,703 different germline variants have been linked to individuals with cancer, as catalogued by the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) TP53 Database (https://tp53.isb-cgc.org). However, research efforts have focused on variants at a few “hotspot” residues that account for only 30% of germline TP53 missense variants found in patients, leaving the majority largely uncharacterized and many still considered variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Therefore, it is of great interest to classify all variants in order to provide more accurate cancer risk assessments with tailored surveillance strategies and treatment plans.
Mutagenesis studies are an important clinical tool used to assess TP53 variant pathogenicity, however, it is often unclear without sub-
stantial clinical evidence that is difficult to obtain from predominantly rare and infrequent variants. The results from large-scale mutagenesis
experiments have demonstrated a broad range of functional consequences associated with different variants, ranging from near wild-type (WT) TP53 capabilities to severe loss-of-function (LOF)13–15. As amultifaceted protein, TP53 is composed of several domains containing complex structured and unstructured regions that enable a myriad of cellular tasks. Primarily operating as a transcription factor, TP53 binds to DNA recognition sequences as a tetramer and regulates the expression of several thousand target genes to orchestrate cellular responses centering around DNA-damage repair (DDR) and cell fate decisions. Hence, variants arising at different locations of the protein can impart different cellular consequences by altering its transcriptional activity (TA) as well as its non-TA. Some variant TP53 species can also exert a dominant-negative (DN) effect over WT TP5317,18. This is an important feature because LFS and germline TP53-related cancer predisposition follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern and most patients are heterozygous carriers who retain one copy of WT TP53. Moreover, TP53 variant LOF can vary under different cellular conditions. For example, the R337H variant—the most frequently reported germline variant due to a genetic founder event in Brazil — has a conditional pH-dependent LOF and is associated with the tissue - specific development of adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC)19,20. Thus, the functional assessments derived from comprehensive variant library screens conducted in varying cellular contexts provide clinically relevant measurements of specific TP53 activities. Here, we incorporated TP53 variant library screens using an unsupervised cluster analysis and uncovered five functionally distinct variant clusters (Fig. 1). When applied to germline variant carriers from the NCI TP53 Database and a validation dataset, we identified unique cancer patterns and significant differences between ages at cancer diagnosis. Additionally, assessment of var ants in cancer cell lines and primary patient-derived healthy skin and blood samples recapitulated the clinical observations. Our variant clustering model provides a classification tool for the risk stratification and consideration for variant interpretation of TP53 variant carriers.
ChotaBheem=0.5 | Kalia = 1.5 | DholuBholu = 100.50 | Tuntun Mausi = 50.0

ChotaBheem=1.5 | Kalia = 2.5 | DholuBholu = 125.50 | Tuntun Mausi = 55.0

