1. Lung Cancer. 2025 Oct;208:108756. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108756. Epub
2025  Sep 16.

Biological impact of chemotherapy during treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors for non-small cell lung cancer positive for EGFR activating 
mutations.

Iwama E(1), Sakai K(2), Harada T(3), Kanda S(4), Sugawara S(5), Yokoyama T(6), 
Taniguchi H(7), Tanaka K(8), Toyozawa R(9), Koyama K(10), Zenke Y(11), Kida 
G(12), Nishioka Y(13), Yokouchi H(14), Hirose M(15), Nishio K(2), Yamamoto 
N(16), Ohe Y(17), Okamoto I(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Genome Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Kindai University, 
Osaka-Sayama, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Japan Community Health Care 
Organization-Kyushu Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Shinshu University School of 
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan; Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer 
Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Sendai Kousei Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kurashiki Central Hospital, Kurashiki, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, 
Osaka-Sayama, Japan.
(9)Department of Thoracic Oncology, NHO Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Niigata Cancer Center Hospital, Niigata, 
Japan.
(11)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 
Kashiwa, Japan.
(12)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, Saitama, Japan.
(13)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Rheumatology, Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima, Japan.
(14)Department of Respiratory Medicine, NHO Hokkaido Cancer Center, Sapporo, 
Japan.
(15)Center for Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, 
Fukuoka, Japan.
(16)Internal Medicine III, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.
(17)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(18)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address: 
okamoto.isamu.290@m.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to explore the biological impact of 
chemotherapy during epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor (TKI) treatment in individuals with non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC).
METHODS: Plasma and tumor tissue specimens were prospectively collected from 
NSCLC patients with EGFR activating mutations who participated in a randomized 
phase III study comparing EGFR-TKI therapy with or without inserted chemotherapy 
(JCOG1404/WJOG8214L). The specimens were analyzed for genetic mutations by 
droplet digital polymerase chain reaction analysis and next-generation 
sequencing.
RESULTS: Two hundred patients were enrolled in this biomarker study, with 113 
and 87 individuals receiving EGFR-TKI monotherapy and EGFR-TKI treatment plus 
inserted chemotherapy, respectively. Although progression-free survival (PFS) 
for EGFR-TKI monotherapy was shorter in patients with than in those without 
detectable EGFR activating mutations in cell-free DNA at baseline, inserted 
chemotherapy improved PFS compared with EGFR-TKI monotherapy for the former 
patients (median, 17.5 vs. 11.8 months). Inserted chemotherapy suppressed the 
number of alleles positive for activating and T790M mutations of EGFR in 
cell-free DNA at disease progression. The benefit of inserted chemotherapy 
relative to EGFR-TKI monotherapy was more apparent in patients with (median PFS, 
18.8 vs. 13.5 months) than in those without detectable concurrent mutations of 
TP53.
CONCLUSIONS: Chemotherapy has the potential to suppress the development of 
EGFR-TKI resistance as well as to inhibit tumor growth for NSCLC positive for 
EGFR activating mutations. Our results provide biological insight into 
combination treatment with EGFR-TKIs and chemotherapy for such patients.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108756
PMID: 40974872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Eiji Iwama has received honoraria 
from AstraZeneca K.K. and Chugai Pharmaceutical. Kazuko Sakai has received 
honoraria from Qiagen, Inc., Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Nippon Kayaku Co., 
Ltd. and Life Technologies Japan Ltd. Shintaro Kanda has received honoraria from 
AstraZeneca K.K., Bristol Myers Squibb. K.K., Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 
Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Eisai Co., Ltd., Guardant Health AMEA, Kyowa Kirin 
Co., Ltd., MSD K.K., Nippon Boehringer. Ingelheim Co., Ltd., Ono Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd., and Taiho Pharmaceutical. Shunichi Sugawara has received honoraria 
from AstraZeneca K.K., Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd., Bristol Myers 
Squibb K.K., Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Eisai, Eli Lilly Japan K.K., Kyowa 
Kirin Co., Ltd., MSD K.K., Merck, Novartis Pharma K.K, Nippon Kayaku Co., Ltd., 
Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Pfizer, Sysmex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Takeda 
Pharmaceutical, and Taiho Pharmaceutical. Toshihide Yokoyama has received 
honoraria from AbbVie GK, AstraZeneca K.K., Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd., 
Bristol Myers Squibb K.K., Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo Co., 
Ltd., Delta-Fly Pharma, Janssen, MSD, Parexel International and Takeda 
Pharmaceutical. Kaoru Tanaka has received honoraria from AstraZeneca K.K., 
Bristol Myers Squibb K.K., Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Eisai, Merck 
Biopharma, MSD, Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Novartis Pharma, Taiho 
Pharmaceutical and Takeda Pharmaceutical. Ryo Toyozawa has received honoraria 
from AstraZeneca K.K., Bristol Myers Squibb K.K., Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd., Eli Lilly Japan K.K., MSD K.K., Nippon Kayaku Co.,Ltd., Ono Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd., Pfizer, Sysmex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Takeda Pharmaceutical, and 
Taiho Pharmaceutical. Yoshitaka Zenke has received honoraria from Amgen Inc., 
AstraZeneca K.K., Bristol-Myers Squibb K.K., Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 
Eli Lilly Japan K.K., Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd., MSD K.K., Nippon Boehringer 
Ingelheim Co., Ltd., Nippon Kayaku Co., Ltd., Novartis Pharma K.K., Ono 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Pfizer Japan Inc., Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., and 
Takeda Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Guardant health, J&J Innovative Medicine; 
grants or other funding from Amgen Inc., AstraZeneca K.K., Chugai Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Merck Biopharma Co., Ltd., MSD K.K., 
Novocure, GSK, and Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd. K. Yasuhiko Nishioka 
has received honoraria from AstraZeneca K.K. Hiroshi Yokouchi has received 
honoraria from AstraZeneca K.K.and Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd; research 
funding from AstraZeneca K.K., Amgen, AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb K.K., Chugai 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Daiichi-Sankyo, MSD K.K., Sanofi, and Takeda 
Pharmaceutical. Kazuto Nishio has received honoraria from AstraZeneca K.K., 
Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly Japan K.K., Invitae 
Japan, MSD K.K., Maruho, Nichirei, Novartis Pharma K.K., Ono Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd., Guardant health, and Janssen Pharmaceutical; grants or other funding from 
Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd., West Japan Oncology Group, Nichirei 
Biosciences Inc. Eli Lilly Japan, Hitachi, Sysmex, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, 
Thoracic Oncology Research Group, Okayama University, SymBio Pharmaceuticals and 
Japan Breast Cancer Research Group. N Yamamoto has honoraria from AbbVie G.K., 
Amgen Inc., Accuray Japan K.K., AstraZeneca K.K., Bristol-Myers Squibb K.K., 
Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Eli Lilly Japan K.K., 
Guardant Health AMEA, Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K., Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd., Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Merck 
Biopharma Co., Ltd., Miyarisan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., USACO Corporation, 
Medical Review Co.,Ltd., KOWA COMPANY LTD. MSD K.K., Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim 
Co., Ltd., Nippon Kayaku Co., Ltd., Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd., ShiftZero K.K., 
Novartis Pharma K.K., Pfizer Japan Inc., Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Takeda 
Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Terumo Corporation, and Tsumura & Co.; grants or 
other funding from AstraZeneca K.K., Amgen Inc., DAIICHI SANKYO, INC., MSD, 
USACO Corporation, Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., and NovartisJapan. Yuichiro Ohe 
has received honoraria from AstraZeneca, Chugai, Eli Lilly, ONO, BMS, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Bayer, Pfizer, MSD, Taiho, Nippon Kayaku, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Eisai, 
Daiichi-Sankyo; grants or other funding from AstraZeneca, Chugai, Eli Lilly, 
Kirin, Sumitomo, Pfizer, Taiho, Novartis, Takeda, Daiichi-Sankyo, Janssen, ONO, 
BMS, Kyorin, Celltrion, Amgen, nippon Kayaku, Boehringer Ingelheim, AnHeart 
Therapeutics Inc. PharmaMar. Isamu Okamoto has received honoraria from 
AstraZeneca, Taiho Pharmaceutical, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ono Pharmaceutical, 
MSD, Eli Lilly Japan K.K., Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Chugai 
Pharmaceutical, Pfizer; grants or other funding from AstraZeneca, Taiho 
Pharmaceutical, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ono Pharmaceutical, MSD, Eli Lilly Japan 
K.K., Astellas, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Chugai Pharmaceutical, Pfizer, 
AbbVie. Other authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.


2. ESMO Open. 2025 Aug;10(8):105506. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.105506. Epub 2025
 Jul 25.

Circulating tumor DNA mutational landscape and dynamics after progression on a 
CDK4/6 inhibitor in the PACE phase II trial for metastatic 
HR-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer.

Jeselsohn R(1), Fu J(1), Ren Y(2), Mahtani R(3), Ma C(4), DeMichele A(5), 
Cristofanilli M(6), Meisel J(7), Miller KD(8), Abdou Y(9), Riley EC(10), Qamar 
R(11), Sharma P(12), Reid S(13), Ko N(14), Liu Y(15), Gauthier E(15), Burstein 
HJ(1), DeMeo M(16), Regan M(17), Tolaney SM(1), Mayer EL(18).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA; Breast Oncology 
Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA; Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA.
(2)Division of Biostatistics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Miami Cancer Institute, Miami, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, USA.
(5)Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, USA.
(7)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, 
Emory University, Atlanta, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology Division, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Chapel Hill, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville 
Health, Louisville, USA.
(11)Aurora Cancer Care, Milwaukee, USA.
(12)Department of Medical Oncology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 
Westwood, USA.
(13)Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, USA.
(14)Department of Medical Oncology, Boston Medical Center, Boston, USA.
(15)Pfizer, La Jolla, USA.
(16)Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA; Breast Oncology 
Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA.
(17)Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA; Division of Biostatistics, Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, Boston, USA.
(18)Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA; Breast Oncology 
Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA; Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA. Electronic address: Erica_Mayer@dfci.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Genomic determinants of response and resistance to endocrine therapy 
(ET) and cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i) beyond progression in 
hormone receptor-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative 
metastatic breast cancer are not well characterized. We analyzed serial 
circulating tumor DNA from the PACE trial in which patients who progressed on ET 
and CDK4/6i were randomized to fulvestrant, fulvestrant plus palbociclib, or 
fulvestrant, palbociclib, and avelumab.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Plasma samples from 200 of 220 PACE participants were 
collected for circulating tumor DNA analysis using the Guardant360 assay. 
Samples included baseline (n = 200), cycle 3, day 1 (C3D1; n = 124), and end of 
treatment (n = 137). The fulvestrant and fulvestrant + palbociclib arms were 
combined given similar clinical outcomes. The log-rank test was used to test 
associations between genomic alterations and progression-free survival (PFS).
RESULTS: The most common baseline genomic alterations beyond progression on 
CDK4/6i plus ET, were mutations in ESR1 (54.0%), TP53 (35.5%), PIK3CA (34.0%), 
GATA3 (18.5%), and RB1 (10.0%). Among 150 patients treated with fulvestrant or 
fulvestrant + palbociclib, baseline mutations in TP53, PIK3CA, RB1, and the 
Y537S ESR1 mutation, were associated with shorter PFS. Mutations within the PI3K 
and cell cycle pathways were associated with significantly decreased PFS. We 
also observed increases in the allelic fractions of the ESR1, PIK3CA, and TP53 
mutations at progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Several mutations within genes and biological pathways are 
associated with CDK4/6i resistance beyond progression. Additional studies are 
needed to optimize treatment after resistance to CDK4/6i using genomic 
biomarkers.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.105506
PMCID: PMC12314381
PMID: 40714513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure RJ reports consulting or advisory 
roles for Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Novartis, Carrick Therapeutics, GE 
Health, and Luminex; and research funding from Pfizer, Eli Lilly, and Novartis. 
RM reports consulting or advisory roles for Agendia, Daiichi Sankyo/AstraZeneca, 
Eisai, Genentech/Roche, Gilead Sciences, Hologic/Biotheranostics, Lilly, Merck, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Puma Biotechnology, Sanofi, Sermonix Pharmaceuticals, and 
Stemline Therapeutics; research funding to the institution from Gilead Sciences; 
and travel, accommodations, and expenses from Pfizer, Gilead, Genentech/Roche, 
Hologic/Biotheranostics, AstraZeneca/Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, Puma, Seagen, and 
Stemline. CM reports consulting or advisory roles for Novartis, AstraZeneca, 
Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Biovica Inc., Olaris, Gilead Sciences, Pfizer, 
Lilly, Tempus, Genzyme, TerSera, Stemline Therapeutics, and Daiichi 
Sankyo/AstraZeneca; and research funding to the institution from Pfizer and Puma 
Biotechnology. AD reports consulting or advisory roles for Pfizer; and research 
funding to the institution from Pfizer, Genentech, Novartis, and 
Inivata/NeoGenomics. MC reports honoraria from Pfizer; consulting or advisory 
roles for Menarini, Olaris, AstraZeneca/Daiichi Sankyo, and Datar Genomics; 
research funding from Celcuity, Syantra, Incyte, AstraZeneca, and Menarini 
Silicon Biosystems; and honoraria from Total Health Conferencing and Medscape. 
JM reports consulting or advisory roles for Novartis, AstraZeneca, Genentech, 
Seagen, Curio Science, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Olema Oncology, GE Healthcare, and 
Pfizer; research funding to the institution from Seagen, Pfizer, Sermonix 
Pharmaceuticals, and Olema Oncology; and travel, accommodations, expenses from 
Pfizer, Total Health Conferencing, and Puma Biotechnology. KDM reports serving 
as a Senior Deputy Editor for the Journal of Clinical Oncology; service on 
independent data monitoring committees for Merck, Genentech/Roche, AstraZeneca, 
Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, and Celcuity; and research funding to the 
institution from Pfizer and Astex Pharmaceuticals. YA reports honoraria from 
WebMD/Medscape, MJH Associates, and Clinical Care Options; and consulting for 
Exact Sciences, AstraZeneca and Pfizer. PS reports stock and other ownership 
interests in Amgen, Johnson & Johnson/Janssen, Roche/Genentech, Gilead Sciences, 
Sanofi, and Pfizer; consulting or advisory roles for Novartis, Merck, 
AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Gilead Sciences, and GSK; research funding to the 
institution from Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck, Novartis, and Gilead 
Sciences; and patents, royalties, and other intellectual property from UpToDate. 
SR reports honoraria from Novartis; consulting or advisory roles from 
AstraZeneca, and Daiichi Sankyo/AstraZeneca; and research funding from Agendia. 
NK reports expert testimony for Williams and Connolly. YL reports employment 
for, and stock and other ownership interests from Pfizer. EG reports employment, 
stock, and other ownership interests in Pfizer. MMR reports research 
funding/resources (to institution) from Bayer, Biotheranostics, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, ETOP IBCSG Partners Foundation, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, and TerSera 
Therapeutics; and consulting, advisory roles or honorarium from Bristol Myers 
Squibb, McGill University supported by Merck, TerSera Therapeutics, and Tolmar 
Pharmaceuticals. SMT reports consulting or advisory roles for Novartis, 
Pfizer/Seagen, Merck, Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, Genentech/Roche, Eisai, Bristol 
Myers Squibb/SystImmune, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Blueprint Medicines, Reveal 
Genomics, Sumitovant Biopharma, Artios Pharma, Menarini/Stemline, Aadi Bio, 
Bayer, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Natera, Tango Therapeutics, eFFECTOR, Hengrui USA, 
Cullinan Oncology, Circle Pharma, Arvinas, BioNTech, Launch Therapeutics, 
Zuellig Pharma, Johnson & Johnson/Ambrx, Bicycle Therapeutics, BeiGene 
Therapeutics, Mersana, Summitt Therapeutics, Avenzo Therapeutics, Aktis 
Oncology, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celcuity, Samsung Bioepis, and Olema; research 
funding from Genentech/Roche, Merck, Exelixis, Pfizer, Lilly, Novartis, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, NanoString Technologies, Gilead, Seagen, OncoPep, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Menarini/Stemline, and Jazz Pharmaceuticals; and travel support 
from Lilly, Gilead, Jazz, Pfizer, Arvinas, and Roche. All other authors have 
declared no conflicts of interest.


3. J Clin Invest. 2025 Jul 24;135(19):e177813. doi: 10.1172/JCI177813.
eCollection  2025 Oct 1.

A predictive endocrine resistance index accurately stratifies luminal breast 
cancer treatment responders and nonresponders.

Zhang G(1), Jurinovic V(1), Bartels S(2), Christgen M(2), Christgen H(2), Kandt 
LD(2), Mishieva L(3)(4), Ni H(5), Raap M(2), Klein J(6), Katzke AL(6), Hofmann 
W(6), Steinemann D(6), Kates RE(7), Gluz O(7)(8)(9), Graeser M(7)(8)(10), Kümmel 
S(7)(11)(12), Nitz U(7)(8), Plass C(13), Lehmann U(2), Zu Eulenburg C(7)(14), 
Mansmann U(1), Gerhäuser C(13), Harbeck N(5)(7), Kreipe HH(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry, and Epidemiology, 
Medical Faculty, Ludwig Maximilians University (LMU), Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Institute of Sociology (IfS), Faculty of Social Sciences, University of 
Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(4)Department of Methodology and Statistics, Faculty of Social & Behavioural 
Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(5)Breast Center, Department OB&GYN and CCC Munich, LMU University Hospital, 
Munich, Germany.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(7)West German Study Group (WSG), Moenchengladbach, Germany.
(8)Ev. Bethesda Hospital, Breast Center Niederrhein, Moenchengladbach, Germany.
(9)University Clinics Cologne, Women's Clinic and Breast Center, Cologne, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Gynecology, University Medical Center, Hamburg, Germany.
(11)Clinics Essen-Mitte, Breast Unit, Essen, Germany.
(12)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Gynecology with Breast 
Center, Berlin, Germany.
(13)Division of Cancer Epigenomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Department of Biometry and Epidemiology, University Medical Center Hamburg, 
Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUNDEndocrine therapy (ET) with tamoxifen (TAM) or aromatase inhibitors 
(AI) is highly effective against hormone receptor-positive (HR-positive) early 
breast cancer (BC), but resistance remains a major challenge. The primary 
objectives of our study were to understand the underlying mechanisms of primary 
resistance and to identify potential biomarkers.METHODSWe selected more than 800 
patients in 3 subcohorts (Discovery, n = 364, matched pairs; Validation 1, n = 
270, Validation 2, n = 176) of the West German Study Group (WSG) ADAPT trial who 
underwent short-term preoperative TAM or AI treatment. Treatment response was 
assessed by immunohistochemical labeling of proliferating cells with Ki67 before 
and after ET. We performed comprehensive molecular profiling, including targeted 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) and DNA methylation analysis using EPIC arrays, 
on posttreatment tumor samples.RESULTSTP53 mutations were strongly associated 
with primary resistance to both TAM and AI. We identified distinct DNA 
methylation patterns in resistant tumors, suggesting alterations in key 
signaling pathways and tumor microenvironment composition. Based on these 
findings and patient age, we developed the Predictive Endocrine ResistanCe Index 
(PERCI). PERCI accurately stratified responders and nonresponders in both 
treatment groups in all 3 subcohorts and predicted progression-free survival in 
an external validation cohort and in the combined subcohorts.CONCLUSIONOur 
results highlight the potential of PERCI to guide personalized endocrine therapy 
and improve patient outcomes.TRIAL REGISTRATIONWSG-ADAPT, ClinicalTrials.gov 
NCT01779206, retrospectively registered 01-25-2013.FUNDINGGerman Cancer Aid 
(Grant Number 70112954), German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
(Grant Number 01ZZ1804C, DIFUTURE).

DOI: 10.1172/JCI177813
PMCID: PMC12483570
PMID: 40705465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: OG received honoraria from 
Genomic Health/Exact Sciences, Roche, Pfizer, Novartis, Agendia, and 
AstraZeneca; served in consulting/advisory role for Genomic Health/Exact 
Sciences, Gilead, AstraZeneca, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Daiichi Sankyo, and 
Roche; and received travel support from Pfizer and Daiichi Sankyo; and reports a 
codirector position at West German Study Group. NH received honoraria from 
AstraZeneca, Daiichi-Sankyo, Gilead, Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Viatris, and Zuellig Pharma; served in 
consulting/advisory role for Agendia, AstraZeneca, Celgene, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Odonate Therapeutics, Pfizer, Pierre 
Fabre, Roche/Genentech, Sandoz, and Seattle Genetics; and she reports a 
codirector position at West German Study Group; her institution received 
research funding from Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Pfizer, and 
Roche/Genentech. RK served in a consulting/advisory role for the West German 
Study Group. UL received speaker honoraria from AstraZeneca, MenariniStemline, 
and GSK and received materials from AstraZeneca. SB received speaker honoraria 
from Thermo Fisher Scientific. CZE has a consulting contract and received 
consulting fees from West-German Study Group (WSG). SK received consulting fees 
from Lilly, MSD, and Stryker; he received honoraria from AstraZeneca, Lilly, 
Pfizer, Novartis, Amgen, Somatex, pfm medical, MSD, Daiichi Sankyo, Seagen, 
Gilead Science, Agendia, Exact Science, Roche, Hologig, and PINK!; received 
travel support from Roche, Daiichi Samkyo, Lilly, Stemline, and MSD; has an 
advisory role for Novartis, Amgen, pfm medical, MSD, Daiichi Sankyo, Seagen, 
Gilead Science, Agendia, Exact Science, Roche, Sonoscape, Lilly, AstraZeneca, 
and Pfizer; has an advocacy function for AGO, WSG, and ESMO; and his institution 
received study material from Novartis, Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, 
AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Lilly, MSD, Roche, Stemline, Hologic, PINK!, and Agendia. 
UN reports honoraria from Agendia, Amgen, Celgene, Genomic Health, NanoString 
Technologies, Novartis Pharma, Pfizer Pharmaceuticals, Roche/Genentech, and 
Teva; consulting or advisory role for Genomic Health, Roche, and Seagen; 
research funding from Agendia, Amgen, Celgene, Genomic Health, NanoString 
Technologies, Roche, and Sanofi; expert testimony for Genomic Health; travel 
support from Genomic Health, Pfizer Pharmaceuticals, and Roche; and a codirector 
position at West German Study Group.


4. EBioMedicine. 2025 Aug;118:105823. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105823. Epub 2025
 Jul 18.

Short-duration preoperative endocrine therapy alters molecular profiles to 
predict favourable outcome in ER+/HER2+ early breast cancer: a POETIC 
translational study.

Sirvén MB(1), López-Knowles E(2), Zhu X(3), Tovey H(3), Kilburn L(3), Holcombe 
C(4), Skene A(5), Robertson J(6), Bliss JM(3), Alataki A(2), Smith I(7), 
Schuster EF(2), Dowsett M(8), Cheang MCU(9).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Trials and Statistics Unit (ICR-CTSU), The Institute of Cancer 
Research, London, UK; Medical Oncology Department, Catalan Institute of 
Oncology-Badalona, Hospital Germans Trias I Pujol (HGTiP), 08916, Badalona, 
Spain; Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(2)Ralph Lauren Centre for Breast Cancer Research, Royal Marsden Hospital, 
London, UK; The Breast Cancer Now Toby Robins Research Centre, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK.
(3)Clinical Trials and Statistics Unit (ICR-CTSU), The Institute of Cancer 
Research, London, UK.
(4)Liverpool University Hospitals Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK.
(5)Royal Bournemouth and Christchurch and Christchurch NHS Foundation Trust, 
Bournemouth, UK.
(6)Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham, 
UK.
(7)Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.
(8)Ralph Lauren Centre for Breast Cancer Research, Royal Marsden Hospital, 
London, UK.
(9)Clinical Trials and Statistics Unit (ICR-CTSU), The Institute of Cancer 
Research, London, UK. Electronic address: Maggie.Cheang@icr.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: About 15-20% of breast cancers (BC) overexpress Human Epidermal 
Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2+), and 50% of them are also oestrogen receptor 
positive (ER+). Patients with ER+/HER2+ BC with a limited response to systemic 
therapies are at an increased risk of relapse, thus understanding the mechanisms 
of resistance is crucial. This study investigates the changes in gene signature 
expression (ΔGSE) within ER+/HER2+ tumours and their intrinsic subtype (IS) in 
response to peri-operative aromatase inhibitors (POAI).
METHODS: We analysed paired pre-treatment (baseline) and on-treatment (2wk) 
samples from 313 ER+/HER2+ BC from the POETIC trial using the BC360™ codeset. 
Early biological response to aromatase inhibitors (AI) was assessed by 
immunohistochemical Ki67 levels. Association of ΔGSE with biological response 
was evaluated using T-test and time to recurrence (TTR) with multivariable Cox 
regression models adjusted for clinicopathological variables.
FINDINGS: The immunity-related signatures were significantly upregulated, while 
proliferation, TP53 surrogate mutational status and ER-signalling were 
downregulated (FDR <0·05) among POAI tumours with low Ki672wk. In the POAI, 79% 
(59/75) of Luminal B (LumB) at baseline shifted to Luminal A (LumA) at 2wk and 
LumA2wk was associated with better TTR compared to LumB2wk (HR 0·2; CI 95% 
0·06-0·72, p = 0·01). Based on Akaike Information Criterion scores, Ki67 and IS 
at 2wk provided better fit of the multivariable Cox models over the variables at 
baseline when predicting TTR.
INTERPRETATION: Assessing on-treatment IS after POAI for ER+HER2+ BC can help to 
identify a group of low-risk patients with LumA2wk with good outcomes on 
de-escalated treatment and patients that require additional treatments.
FUNDING: Cancer Research UK (CRUK/07/015).

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105823
PMCID: PMC12368290
PMID: 40683772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests M.B.S declares funding 
from Fundación Alfonso Martin Escudero, Rio Hortega contracts 2022/2023 
CM22/00101 and the 2024 BBVA Foundation/Hospital Clinic of Barcelona Joan 
Rodés-Josep Baselga Advanced Research Contracts in Oncology for Milana 
Bergamino's fellowship funding. She also declares personal funding from Pfizer, 
Novartis and Astra Zeneca and travel expenses from Novartis, Lilly and Astra 
Zeneca for educational events and advisories. M.C.U.C. is an inventor on US 
Patent No. 9,631,239 (“Method of classifying a breast cancer intrinsic subtype”) 
with royalties paid. She is also an inventor on a pending patent application 
(PCT/EP2021/07368) related to a CDK4/6 inhibitor sensitivity assay. 
Additionally, she serves in an advisory role for Veracyte. H.T. declares 
receiving salary support from AstraZeneca UK Ltd, Eli Lilly & Co Limited, Pfizer 
Inc., Aventis Pharma Limited (Sanofi), the National Institute for Health 
Research, the Higher Education Funding Council, Cancer Research UK, and Prostate 
Cancer UK. JMB reports grants from Cancer Research UK, during the conduct of the 
study; grants from Medivation; grants and non-financial support from 
AstraZeneca, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Puma Biotechnology, Clovis Oncology, Pfizer, 
Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Lilly and Roche, outside the submitted work. LK reports 
grant from Cancer Research UK and the National Institute for Health and Care 
Research, during the conduct of the study. CH declares payment for expert 
testimony from the General Medical Council and honoraria from Exact Science. EFS 
declares a pending patent application (PCT/EP2021/07368) related to a CDK4/6 
inhibitor sensitivity assay. M.D. receives compensation through the ICR Rewards 
for Inventors Scheme for abiraterone and is an inventor on a pending patent 
application (PCT/EP2021/07368) related to a CDK4/6 inhibitor sensitivity assay. 
The other authors declare no competing interests.


5. Clin Cancer Res. 2025 Aug 1;31(15):3160-3174. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-3705.

GANNET53 Part II: A European Phase I/II Trial of the HSP90 Inhibitor Ganetespib 
in High-Grade Platinum-Resistant Ovarian Cancer-A Study of the GANNET53 
Consortium.

Concin N(1)(2), Braicu I(3)(4), Combe P(5), Berger R(1), Ray-Coquard I(6), Joly 
F(7), Harter P(8), Canzler U(9)(10), Selle F(11), Mahner S(12), Ignatov A(13), 
Sehouli J(3), Pujade-Lauraine E(5), Zeimet AG(1), Schmitt WD(14), Van 
Nieuwenhuysen E(15), Vanderstichele A(15), Dobbelstein M(16), Kramer D(16), 
Ulmer H(17), Zeillinger R(2), Obermayr E(2), Heinzl N(2), Marth C(1), Moll 
UM(16), Vergote I(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Innsbruck, AGO 
Austria, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Comprehensive Cancer Center - 
Gynaecologic Cancer Unit, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Gynecology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate 
member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin 
Institute of Health, Campus Virchow, NOGGO group, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(5)Assistance Publique - Hopitaux De Paris, GINECO group, Paris, France.
(6)Centre Anticancereux Léon Bérard, University Claude Bernard Lyon, GINECO 
group, Lyon, France.
(7)Medical Oncology Department, Centre François Baclesse, University Unicaen 
Caen, GINECO group, Caen, France.
(8)Ev. Kliniken Essen-Mitte, AGO Study Group, Essen, Germany.
(9)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Medical Faculty and University 
Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, AGO Study Group, 
Dresden, Germany.
(10)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Croix Saint-Simon Diaconesses Hospital 
Group, GINECO group, Paris, France.
(12)Department of Gynecology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, AGO 
Study Group, Hamburg, Germany.
(13)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital Magdeburg, 
NOGGO group, Hamburg, Germany.
(14)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität 
Berlin and HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin, Institute of Pathology, NOGGO group, 
Berlin, Germany.
(15)Division of Gynecological Oncology, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, BGOG, European Union, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(16)Department of Molecular Oncology, Universitätsmedizin Göttingen, 
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(17)Department of Medical Statistics, Informatics and Health Economics, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

PURPOSE: Mutant p53 stabilized by heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a novel 
target in oncology. The open-label, randomized phase II GANNET53 trial is the 
first to evaluate the HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib (G) with paclitaxel (P) in 
platinum-resistant epithelial ovarian cancer (EUDRACT 2013-003868-31; EU FP7 
#602602).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were randomized 2:1 to receive G + P or P alone 
until progression. Primary endpoints were progression-free survival (PFS) and 
PFS rate at 6 months. Exploratory endpoints were biomarkers based on p53 and 
HSP90.
RESULTS: A total of 133 patients were enrolled. The median PFS was 3.5 (G + P) 
and 5.3 months (P) (HR = 1.3; 95% confidence interval, 0.897-1.895; P = 0.16), 
and PFS rates at 6 months were 22% (G + P) and 33% (P). No significant 
differences were found in overall survival, objective response rate, and 
post-progression PFS between arms. The most frequent adverse events were 
diarrhea (79% vs. 26%), anemia (46% vs. 51%), nausea (41% vs. 40%), and 
peripheral neuropathy (36% vs. 47%). Serious adverse events were more common in 
G + P (39.5% vs. 23.3%). Gastrointestinal perforation was a new safety finding. 
Despite a high TP53 mutation frequency, HSP90-p53 complexes were detected in 
only 39.6% of the cases and were also detected stably during treatment. In 
vitro, no synergistic effects of G + P were observed, and mutant p53 depletion 
did not sensitize ovarian cancer cells to treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Although no major safety findings were observed, G + P did not lead 
to survival benefit. Our companion diagnostic program confirmed that G + P do 
not favorably cooperate in killing ovarian cancer cells.

©2025 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-3705
PMID: 40435111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nat Commun. 2025 Mar 4;16(1):2195. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-57293-9.

Determinants of response and molecular dynamics in HER2+ER+ breast cancers from 
the NA-PHER2 trial receiving HER2-targeted and endocrine therapies.

Callari M(1), Dugo M(2), Barreca M(1)(3), Győrffy B(4)(5)(6), Galbardi B(2), 
Vigano L(2), Locatelli A(2), Dall'Ara C(2), Ferrarini M(2), Bisagni G(7), 
Colleoni M(8), Mansutti M(9), Zamagni C(10), Del Mastro L(11)(12), Zambelli 
S(2), Frassoldati A(13), Biasi O(8), Pusztai L(14), Valagussa P(1), Viale 
G(1)(8), Gianni L(15), Bianchini G(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione Michelangelo, Milan, Italy.
(2)IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
Milan, Italy.
(4)Dept. of Bioinformatics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Dept. of Biophysics, Medical School, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary.
(6)Cancer Biomarker Research Group, Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, 
Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(7)AUSL - IRCCS, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(8)IEO, European Institute of Oncology, IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(9)Udine Academic Hospital, Udine, Italy.
(10)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria, Bologna, Italy.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties (DiMI), School of 
Medicine, Università di Genova, Genoa, Italy.
(12)Department of Medical Oncology, UO Clinica di Oncologia Medica, IRCCS 
Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
(13)Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria S. Anna, Ferrara, Italy.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Medical Oncology, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(15)Fondazione Michelangelo, Milan, Italy. 
luca.gianni@fondazionemichelangelo.org.
(16)IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy. bianchini.giampaolo@hsr.it.
(17)UniSR San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. bianchini.giampaolo@hsr.it.

Improved outcomes in HER2+ female breast cancer have resulted from chemotherapy 
and anti-HER2 therapies. However, HER2+ER+ cancers exhibit lower response rates. 
The phase 2 NA-PHER2 trial (NCT02530424) investigated chemo-free preoperative 
HER2 blockade (trastuzumab + pertuzumab) and CDK4/6 inhibition (palbociclib) 
with or without endocrine therapy (fulvestrant) in HER2+ER+ breast cancer. 
Clinical endpoints (i.e. Ki67 dynamics and pathological complete response) were 
previously reported. Here we report on the biomarker analysis, secondary 
objective of the study. Through RNA sequencing and tumour infiltrating 
lymphocytes (TIL) assessment in serial biopsies, we identified biomarkers 
predictive of pCR or Day14 Ki67 response and unveiled treatment-induced 
molecular changes. High immune infiltration and low ER signalling correlated 
with pCR, while TP53 mutations associated with high Day14 Ki67. Stratification 
based on Ki67 at Day14 and at surgery defined three response groups (Ki67 
HighHigh, LowHigh, LowLow), with divergent tumour and stroma expression 
dynamics. The HighHigh group showed dysfunctional immune infiltration and 
overexpression of therapeutic targets like PAK4 at baseline. The LowLow group 
exhibited a Luminal A phenotype by the end of treatment. This study expands our 
understanding of drivers and dynamics of HER2+ER+ tumour response, towards 
treatment tailoring.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-57293-9
PMCID: PMC11880565
PMID: 40038334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: G.V. received 
grants/research supports from: Roche/Genentech, Ventana Medical Systems, 
Dako/Agilent Technologies; honoraria or consultation feesfrom: Ventana, 
Dako/Agilent, Roche, MSD Oncology, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, Eli 
Lilly. All the authors declare no conflicts of interest. L.P. has received 
consulting fees and honoraria for advisory board participation from Pfizer, 
Astra Zeneca, Merck, Novartis, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Stemline-Menarini, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Genentech/Roche, Personalis, Daiichi, Natera, Exact Sciences 
and institutional research funding from Seagen, GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, 
Merck, Pfizer and Bristol Myers Squibb. M.Co. received an institutional research 
grant from Roche. G.B. reports personal fees for consultancy/honorarium/advisory 
role: Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, AstraZeneca, Amgen, MSD, Chugai, Sanofi, 
Daiichi Sankyo, EISAI, Gilead, Menarini/stemline, Exact Science, Seagen, 
Agendia; institutional fee for research grant from Gilead. L.G. reports grants 
from Roche, Breast Cancer Research Foundation (BCRF), and Pfizer during the 
conduct of the study; personal fees from AstraZeneca, Ely Lilly and Company, 
Roche, Pfizer, Seattle Genentics, Artemida Pharma, Synaffix, Menarini Ricerche, 
and Biomedical Insights; grants and personal fees from Zymeworks and Revolution 
Medicine; other support from METIS Precision Medicine, Amgen, and QU Biologics 
outside the submitted work; in addition, L.G. has a patent for EU N. 12195182 
issued and a patent for EU N.12196177.5 issued.


7. J Clin Oncol. 2025 Mar;43(7):788-799. doi: 10.1200/JCO-24-02503. Epub 2024 Dec
 7.

Phase II Study of Acalabrutinib, Venetoclax, and Obinutuzumab in a 
Treatment-Naïve Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Population Enriched for High-Risk 
Disease.

Davids MS(1), Ryan CE(1), Lampson BL(1), Ren Y(2), Tyekucheva S(2), Fernandes 
SM(1), Crombie JL(1), Kim AI(1), Weinstock M(3), Montegaard J(1), Walker HA(1), 
Greenman C(1), Patterson V(1), Jacobson CA(1), LaCasce AS(1), Armand P(1), 
Fisher DC(1), Lo S(4), Olszewski AJ(5), Arnason JE(3), Ahn IE(1), Brown JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Data Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(3)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, MA.
(4)Stamford Hospital, Stamford, CT.
(5)Brown University Health, Providence, RI.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2025 Feb;43(4):480. doi: 10.1200/JCO-24-02716.
    J Clin Oncol. 2025 Apr 20;43(12):1521-1522. doi: 10.1200/JCO-25-00466.

PURPOSE: The AMPLIFY trial recently established fixed-duration acalabrutinib, 
venetoclax, and obinutuzumab (AVO) as a new standard-of-care option for patients 
with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) with wild-type 
TP53; however, due to the chemoimmunotherapy control arm, AMPLIFY excluded 
patients with high-risk TP53 aberration, for whom current standards of care are 
continuous Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy or alternatively 
fixed-duration venetoclax-based doublets. AVO has not previously been evaluated 
in patients with CLL with TP53 aberration.
METHODS: This investigator-sponsored, multicenter, phase II study enrolled 
patients with treatment-naïve CLL enriched for high-risk CLL, defined by TP53 
aberration (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03580928). Patients received 
acalabrutinib, obinutuzumab, and then venetoclax, with each treatment introduced 
sequentially and in combination, with the duration guided by measurable residual 
disease (MRD). Patients who achieved undetectable MRD (uMRD) after either 15 or 
24 cycles could discontinue treatment. The primary end point was complete 
remission (CR) with bone marrow uMRD (BM-uMRD) at the start of cycle 16.
RESULTS: Seventy-two patients were accrued, including 45 patients with TP53 
aberration. The CR with BM-uMRD rates at the start of cycle 16 were 42% in 
patients with TP53 aberration and 42% in all-comers, and the BM-uMRD rates were 
71% and 78%, respectively. Hematologic toxicities were mainly low grade, and 
cardiovascular toxicities and bleeding complications were infrequent. After a 
median follow-up of 55.2 months, 10 patients had progressed, including four with 
transformation, and three patients died. Four-year progression-free survival and 
overall survival for patients with or without TP53 aberration were 70%/96% and 
88%/100%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: AVO was highly active and well tolerated in patients with previously 
untreated high-risk CLL, supporting its use as a new standard-of-care treatment 
option.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO-24-02503
PMCID: PMC11996140
PMID: 39645236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Steve Lo is the chair of Medical Advisory Board 
for Breast Cancer Alliance, Greenwich, CT (received no payments). Adam J. 
Olszewski has received consulting fees from Genmab, BeiGene, Blue Cross and Blue 
Shield of Rhode Island, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Schrodinger, ADC Therapeutics. 
Phillipe Armand has received consultancy fees from Merck, Bristol Meyers 
Squibb/Celgene, Pfizer, Affimed, Adaptive, Infinity, ADC Therapeutics, 
Morphosys, Daiichi Sankyo, Miltenyi, Tessa, GenMab, C4, Enterome, Regeneron, 
Epizyme, Astra Zeneca, Genentech/Roche, Xencor, Foresight, ATB Therapeutics, 
Stelexis, research funding from Kite Pharma, institutional research funding from 
Merck, BMS-Celgene, Affimed, Adaptive, Tensha, Otsuka, Sigma Tau, 
Genentech/Roche, IGM, Astra Zeneca, and honoraria from Merck and Bristol Meyers 
Squibb. Josie Montegaard has participated on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or 
Advisory Board for Abbvie, Beigene, Bristol Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca. Jon 
Arnason has received payment for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, 
manuscript writing or educational events from the Regeneon Speakers Fee (June 
2024). Inhye Ahn has received grants or contracts from Lilly (to the 
institution), consulting fees from AstraZeneca, BeiGene, and Lilly, and feeds 
for participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board, BeiGene. 
Jennifer Crombie has received consulting fees from Genentech/Roche and research 
support from Abbvie. Austin Kim had received grants or contracts for the 
institution from AstraZeneca, Research funding to institution, honoraria for 
invited presentations for the Community Oncology Connections On-line CME 2024, 
New York Oncology Hematology. Caron Jacobson has received consulting fees from 
Kite Pharma/Gilead, Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb, Galapagos, Caribou, Appia, 
ADC Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Abbvie, Miltenyi, Janssen, Sana, Synthekine, 
Kyverna, and has received fees from participation on a Data Safety Monitoring 
Board or Advisory Board from Kyverna. Benjamin Lampson is a paid employee of 
Blueprint Medicines since April 2023 and has stock and stock options in 
Blueprint Medicines. Ann LaCasce has received consulting fees from Genmab, 
Curio, Pierre Fabre, MJH Life Sciences, Ideology, and payment or honoraria for 
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational 
events, Research to Practice. Matthew Davids has received support for the 
present manuscript (e.g., funding, provision of study materials, medical 
writing, article processing charges, etc.) from AstraZeneca, research grants 
from Ascentage Pharma, MEI Pharma, and Novartis, royalties from UpToDate, 
Consulting fees from AbbVie, Adaptive Biotechnologies, Ascentage Pharma, 
AstraZeneca, BeiGene, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Genentech, Genmab, 
Janssen, Merck, MEI Pharma, Nuvalent, SecuraBio, Takeda, TG Therapeutics, 
participated on a Data Safety Monitoring (Chair, CLL17 Trial DMC). Jennifer R. 
Brown has received research funding from BeiGene, Gilead, iOnctura, Loxo/Lilly, 
MEI Pharma, SecuraBio, and TG Therapeutics, royalties from UpToDate, served as a 
consultant for Abbvie, Acerta/Astra-Zeneca, Alloplex Biotherapeutics, BeiGene, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, EcoR1, Galapagos NV, Genentech/Roche, Grifols Worldwide 
Operations, InnoCare Pharma Inc, iOnctura, Kite Pharma, Loxo/Lilly, Magnet 
Biomedicine, Merck, Numab Therapeutics, Pfizer, & Pharmacyclics, and serves on 
the Data Safety Monitoring Board for Grifols Therapeutics. All other authors 
report no disclosures.


8. Ann Oncol. 2024 Nov;35(11):968-980. doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2024.08.2242. Epub 
2024 Sep 14.

ENGOT-en11/GOG-3053/KEYNOTE-B21: a randomised, double-blind, phase III study of 
pembrolizumab or placebo plus adjuvant chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy 
in patients with newly diagnosed, high-risk endometrial cancer.

Van Gorp T(1), Cibula D(2), Lv W(3), Backes F(4), Ortaç F(5), Hasegawa K(6), 
Lindemann K(7), Savarese A(8), Laenen A(9), Kim YM(10), Bodnar L(11), 
Barretina-Ginesta MP(12), Gilbert L(13), Pothuri B(14), Chen X(15), Flores 
MB(16), Levy T(17), Colombo N(18), Papadimitriou C(19), Buchanan T(20), Hanker 
LC(21), Eminowicz G(22), Rob L(23), Black D(24), Lichfield J(25), Lin G(26), 
Orlowski R(26), Keefe S(26), Lortholary A(27), Slomovitz B(28); 
ENGOT-en11/GOG-3053/KEYNOTE-B21 investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gynaecological Oncology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven 
Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium; Belgian and Luxembourg Gynaecological 
Oncology Group (BGOG), Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
toon.vangorp@uzleuven.be.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Neonatology, General University 
Hospital in Prague, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic; Central and Eastern European Gynecologic Oncology Group (CEEGOG), 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Ohio State University and James Cancer 
Hospital, Columbus, USA; GOG Foundation, Philadelphia, USA.
(5)Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey; Turkish Society of 
Gynecologic Oncology (TRSGO), Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Saitama Medical University International 
Medical Center, Hidaka, Saitama Prefecture, Japan.
(7)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; 
Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway; Nordic Society of Gynaecological Oncology - Clinical Trial Unit 
(NSGO-CTU), Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)IRCCS - Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy; Multicenter 
Italian Trials in Ovarian Cancer and Gynecologic Malignancies (MITO), Rome, 
Italy.
(9)Belgian and Luxembourg Gynaecological Oncology Group (BGOG), Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Biostatistics and Statistical Bioinformatics Center, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Asan Medical Center, University of 
Ulsan, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(11)Department of Clinical Oncology and Radiotherapy, Mazovia Regional Hospital, 
Siedlce Oncology Center, Siedlce, Poland; Polish Group of Gynaecological 
Oncology (PGOG), Warsaw, Poland.
(12)Catalan Institute of Oncology and Girona Biomedical Research Institute, 
Medical School University of Girona, Girona, Spain; Spanish Ovarian Cancer 
Research Group (GEICO), Madrid, Spain.
(13)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, 
Canada; Women's Health Research Unit, Research Institute McGill University 
Health Centre, Montreal, Canada; Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, Canada.
(14)GOG Foundation, Philadelphia, USA; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
and Medicine, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU 
Langone Health, New York, USA.
(15)Department of Oncology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Gynecologic Oncology Group (SGOG), 
Shanghai, China.
(16)Instituto Oncológico Fundación Arturo López Pérez, Santiago, Chile.
(17)Gynecologic Oncology Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Israeli 
Society of Gynecology Oncology (ISGO), Wolfson Medical Center, Affiliated with 
the Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Holon, Israel.
(18)Gynecologic Oncology Program, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, 
Italy; Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, 
Italy; Mario Negri Gynecologic Oncology (MaNGO), Milan, Italy.
(19)Aretaieio University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece; Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group (HeCOG), Athens, 
Greece.
(20)GOG Foundation, Philadelphia, USA; Jefferson Health, Asplundh Cancer 
Pavilion, Willow Grove, USA.
(21)University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Lubeck, Germany; Department of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany; 
German Gynecological Oncology Group (AGO), Wiesbaden, Germany.
(22)University College London Hospitals and University College London, London, 
UK; National Cancer Research Institute (NCRI), London, UK.
(23)Central and Eastern European Gynecologic Oncology Group (CEEGOG), Prague, 
Czech Republic; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty Hospital 
Kralovske Vinohrady, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(24)GOG Foundation, Philadelphia, USA; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
LSU Health Shreveport, Shreveport, USA; Willis-Knighton Physician Network, 
Shreveport, USA.
(25)MSD, London, UK.
(26)Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, USA.
(27)Centre Catherine de Sienne, Hôpital Privé du Confluent, Nantes, France; 
National Investigators Group for the Study of Ovarian and Breast Cancers 
(GINECO), Paris, France.
(28)GOG Foundation, Philadelphia, USA; Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy provides clinically meaningful 
benefit as first-line therapy for advanced (locoregional extension and residual 
disease after surgery)/metastatic/recurrent mismatch repair-proficient (pMMR) 
and mismatch repair-deficient (dMMR) endometrial cancer, with greater magnitude 
of benefit in the dMMR phenotype. We evaluated the addition of pembrolizumab to 
adjuvant chemotherapy (with/without radiation therapy) among patients with newly 
diagnosed, high-risk endometrial cancer without any residual macroscopic disease 
following curative-intent surgery.
METHODS: We included patients with histologically confirmed high-risk 
[International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage I/II of 
non-endometrioid histology or endometrioid histology with p53/TP53 abnormality, 
or stage III/IVA of any histology] endometrial cancer following surgery with 
curative intent and no evidence of disease postoperatively, with no prior 
radiotherapy or systemic therapy. Patients were randomised to pembrolizumab 200 
mg or placebo every 3 weeks (Q3W) for six cycles added to carboplatin-paclitaxel 
followed by pembrolizumab 400 mg or placebo every 6 weeks (Q6W) for six cycles 
per treatment assignment. Radiotherapy was at the investigator's discretion. The 
primary endpoints were investigator-assessed disease-free survival (DFS) and 
overall survival in the intention-to-treat population.
RESULTS: A total of 1095 patients were randomised (pembrolizumab, n = 545; 
placebo, n = 550). At this interim analysis (data cut-off, 4 March 2024), 119 
(22%) DFS events occurred in the pembrolizumab group and 121 (22%) occurred in 
the placebo group [hazard ratio 1.02, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.79-1.32; 
P = 0.570]. Kaplan-Meier estimates of 2-year DFS rates were 75% and 76% in the 
pembrolizumab and placebo groups, respectively. The hazard ratio for DFS was 
0.31 (95% CI 0.14-0.69) in the dMMR population (n = 281) and 1.20 (95% CI 
0.91-1.57) in the pMMR population (n = 814). Grade ≥3 adverse events (AEs) 
occurred in 386 of 543 (71%) and 348 of 549 (63%) patients in the pembrolizumab 
and placebo groups, respectively. No treatment-related grade 5 AEs occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Adjuvant pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy did not improve DFS in 
patients with newly diagnosed, high-risk, all-comer endometrial cancer. 
Preplanned subgroup analyses for stratification factors suggest that 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy improved DFS in patients with dMMR tumours. 
Safety was manageable.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04634877; EudraCT, 2020-003424-17.
RESEARCH SUPPORT: Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., 
Rahway, NJ, USA.

Copyright © 2024 Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., 
Rahway, NJ, USA., The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annonc.2024.08.2242
PMID: 39284383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2024 Aug 6;73(10):197. doi: 
10.1007/s00262-024-03782-7.

Genomic and transcriptomic profiles associated with response to eribulin and 
nivolumab combination in HER-2-negative metastatic breast cancer.

Park C(1), Suh KJ(1), Kim SH(2), Lee KH(3), Im SA(3), Kim MH(4), Sohn J(4), 
Jeong JH(5), Jung KH(5), Lee KE(6), Park YH(7), Kim HJ(8), Cho EK(9), Choi 
IS(10), Noh SJ(11), Shin I(11), Cho DY(11), Kim JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul 
National University Bundang Hospital, 82, Gumi-Ro, Bundang-Gu, Seongnam, 13620, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul 
National University Bundang Hospital, 82, Gumi-Ro, Bundang-Gu, Seongnam, 13620, 
Republic of Korea. sehyunkim@snubh.org.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Cancer 
Research Institute, Seoul National University, College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei Cancer 
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Ewha Womans University Hospital, 
Seoul, Korea.
(7)Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(9)Division of Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Gil Medical Center, 
Gachon University College of Medicine, Incheon, Korea.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul 
National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(11)PentaMedix Co., Ltd, Seongnam, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Biomarkers for predicting response to the immunotherapy and 
chemotherapy combination in breast cancer patients are not established. In this 
study, we report exploratory genomic and transcriptomic analyses of pretreatment 
tumor tissues from patients enrolled in phase II clinical trial of a combination 
of eribulin and nivolumab for HER-2-negative metastatic breast cancer (MBC) 
(KORNELIA trial, NCT04061863).
METHODS: We analyzed associations between tumor molecular profiles based on 
genomic (n = 76) and transcriptomic data (n = 58) and therapeutic efficacy. 
Patients who achieved progression-free survival (PFS) ≥ 6 months were defined as 
PFS6-responders and PFS6-nonresponders otherwise.
FINDINGS: Analyses on tumor mutation burden (TMB) showed a tendency toward a 
favorable effect on efficacy, while several analyses related to homologous 
recombination deficiency (HRD) indicated a potentially negative impact on 
efficacy. Patients harboring TP53 mutations showed significantly poor PFS6 rate 
and PFS, which correlated with the enrichment of cell cycle-related signatures 
in PFS6-nonresponders. High antigen presentation gene set enrichment scores 
(≥ median) were significantly associated with longer PFS. Naïve B-cell and 
plasma cell proportions were considerably higher in long responders 
(≥ 18 months).
INTERPRETATION: Genomic features including TMB, HRD, and TP53 mutations and 
transcriptomic features related to immune cell profiles and cell cycle may 
distinguish responders. Our findings provide insights for further exploring the 
combination regimen and its biomarkers in these tumors.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-024-03782-7
PMCID: PMC11303363
PMID: 39105849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Seung-Jae Noh, Inkyung Shin, and Dae-Yeon Cho 
are employees of PentaMedix Co., Ltd. There are no other conflicts of interest 
to declare.


10. Cancer Med. 2024 Jul;13(14):e70028. doi: 10.1002/cam4.70028.

Phase 1 dose escalation study of the MDM2 inhibitor milademetan as monotherapy 
and in combination with azacitidine in patients with myeloid malignancies.

DiNardo CD(1), Olin R(2), Wang ES(3), Skikne B(4), Rosenthal J(5), Kumar P(6), 
Sumi H(7), Hizukuri Y(7), Hong Y(6), Patel P(6), Seki T(6), Duan T(6), 
Lesegretain A(6), Andreeff M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Roswell Park Comprehensive Care Center, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(4)University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, City of Hope, Duarte, California, USA.
(6)Daiichi Sankyo Inc., Basking Ridge, New Jersey, USA.
(7)Daiichi Sankyo Co., Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mouse double minute-2 homolog (MDM2) plays a key role in 
downregulating p53 activity in hematologic malignancies, and its overexpression 
is associated with poor outcomes.
METHODS: This phase 1 study assessed the safety and efficacy of different dosing 
regimens of the MDM2 inhibitor milademetan as monotherapy and in combination 
with azacitidine (AZA) in patients with relapsed or refractory acute myeloid 
leukemia or high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes.
RESULTS: Seventy-four patients (monotherapy, n = 57; milademetan-AZA 
combination, n = 17) were treated. The maximum tolerated dose of milademetan was 
160 mg once daily given for the first 14-21 days of 28-day cycles as monotherapy 
and on Days 5-14 in combination with AZA. Dose-limiting toxicities were 
gastrointestinal, fatigue, or renal/electrolyte abnormalities. 
Treatment-emergent adverse events related to milademetan occurred in 82.5% and 
64.7% of participants in the monotherapy and AZA combination arms, respectively. 
Two participants (4.2%) in the monotherapy arm achieved complete remission (CR), 
and 1 (2.1%) achieved CR with incomplete blood count recovery (CRi). Two 
participants (13.3%) achieved CRi in the combination arm. New TP53 mutations, 
detected only during milademetan monotherapy, were found pre-existing below 
standard detection frequency by droplet digital polymerase chain reaction.
INTERPRETATION: Milademetan was relatively well tolerated in this population; 
however, despite signals of activity, clinical efficacy was minimal.

© 2024 The Author(s). Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.70028
PMCID: PMC11258486
PMID: 39030997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CDD has received research support and/or 
consulting fees from Abbvie, Astellas, Astex, Beigene, BMS, Cleave, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Foghorn, Genetech, GenMab, Gilead, GSK, Immunogen, ImmuneOnc, Jazz, 
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, Loxo, Novartis, Notable Labs, Rigel, Servier; RO 
has received support and/or consulting fees from Actinium, Cellectis, Rigel, and 
Servier; ESW has received advisory board and/or consulting fees from Abbvie, 
BMS, CTI Biopharma, Daiichi Sankyo, Genentech, GSK, Johnson & Johnson, Kite, 
Kura, Novartis, Rigel, Sellas, and Sumitomo Pharma; speaker fees from Astellas, 
Kura, and Pfizer; and participation fees from Abbvie and Gilead; BS is an 
investigator in the study and in so doing, payment for the cost of conduct of 
the study as well as receipt of the investigative agents were made to the 
Clinical Cancer Research Institute at the University of Kansas Cancer Center; JR 
has no competing interests related to this manuscript; MA has received research 
support, consulting and/or advisory fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Breast Cancer 
Research Foundation, Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas, 
Celegene, Daiichi Sankyo, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Karyopharm Therapeutics, 
National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute, Ono Pharmaceutical, 
Reata Pharmaceuticals, Senti Biosciences, United Therapeutics; travel expenses 
from Amgen, Aptose Biosciences, AstraZeneca, Oncoceutics; holds a patent with 
Reata Pharmaceuticals; and holds stock and other ownership interests in Aptose 
Biosciences, Eutropics, Oncoceutics, Oncolyze; PK, Y Hong, PP, TS, TD and AL are 
employed at Daiichi Sankyo Inc, the study sponsor, and HS and Y Hizukuri are 
employed at Daiichi Sankyo Co, Ltd, Japan, and all own company stocks.


11. Breast Cancer. 2024 Sep;31(5):886-897. doi: 10.1007/s12282-024-01603-4. Epub 
2024 Jun 13.

Neoadjuvant talazoparib in patients with germline BRCA1/2 mutation-positive, 
early-stage triple-negative breast cancer: exploration of tumor BRCA mutational 
status.

Telli ML(1), Litton JK(2), Beck JT(3), Jones JM(4), Andersen J(5), Mina LA(6), 
Brig R(7), Danso M(8), Yuan Y(9), Symmans WF(10), Hopkins JF(11), Albacker 
LA(11), Abbattista A(12), Noonan K(13), Mata M(14), Laird AD(15), Blum JL(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
USA. mtelli@stanford.edu.
(2)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Highlands Oncology, 
Springdale, AR, USA.
(4)Avera Medical Group Oncology & Hematology, Avera Cancer Institute, Sioux 
Falls, SD, USA.
(5)Medical Oncology, Compass Oncology, West Cancer Center, US Oncology Network, 
Tigard, OR, USA.
(6)Hematology Oncology Department, Banner MD Anderson Cancer Center, Gilbert, 
AZ, USA.
(7)Medical Oncology, Brig Center for Cancer Care and Survivorship, Knoxville, 
TN, USA.
(8)Medical Oncology, Virginia Oncology Associates, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology & Therapeutics Research, Cedars-Sinai Cancer 
Center, West Hollywood, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(11)Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(12)Clinical Statistics, Pfizer Oncology, Milan, Italy.
(13)Clinical Oncology, Pfizer Inc., Groton, CT, USA.
(14)Pfizer Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA.
(15)Pfizer Inc., South San Franciso, CA, USA.
(16)Department of Oncology, Texas Oncology-Baylor Charles A. Sammons Cancer 
Center, US Oncology Network, Dallas, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Talazoparib monotherapy in patients with germline BRCA-mutated, 
early-stage triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) showed activity in the 
neoadjuvant setting in the phase II NEOTALA study (NCT03499353). These biomarker 
analyses further assessed the mutational landscape of the patients enrolled in 
the NEOTALA study.
METHODS: Baseline tumor tissue from the NEOTALA study was tested retrospectively 
using FoundationOne®CDx. To further hypothesis-driven correlative analyses, 
agnostic heat-map visualizations of the FoundationOne®CDx tumor dataset were 
used to assess overall mutational landscape and identify additional candidate 
predictive biomarkers of response.
RESULTS: All patients enrolled (N = 61) had TNBC. In the biomarker analysis 
population, 75.0% (39/52) and 25.0% (13/52) of patients exhibited BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 mutations, respectively. Strong concordance (97.8%) was observed between 
tumor BRCA and germline BRCA mutations, and 90.5% (38/42) of patients with tumor 
BRCA mutations evaluable for somatic-germline-zygosity were predicted to exhibit 
BRCA loss of heterozygosity (LOH). No patients had non-BRCA germline DNA damage 
response (DDR) gene variants with known/likely pathogenicity, based on a panel 
of 14 non-BRCA DDR genes. Ninety-eight percent of patients had TP53 mutations. 
Genomic LOH, assessed continuously or categorically, was not associated with 
response.
CONCLUSION: The results from this exploratory biomarker analysis support the 
central role of BRCA and TP53 mutations in tumor pathobiology. Furthermore, 
these data support assessing germline BRCA mutational status for molecular 
eligibility for talazoparib in patients with TNBC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12282-024-01603-4
PMCID: PMC11341741
PMID: 38869771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MLT reports research support (to her 
institution) from Arvinas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Blueprint Medicines, Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Hummingbird Biosciences, Merck, Novartis, OncoSec Medical, 
Pfizer, RefleXion, and Replicate; and consulting/advisory fees from AstraZeneca, 
Daiichi Sankyo, G1 Therapeutics, Genentech/Roche, Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Guardant, Merck, Natera, Novartis, OncoSec Medical, Pfizer, and Sanofi-Aventis. 
JKL reports research support (to her institution) from AstraZeneca, EMD Serono, 
Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Medivation/Pfizer, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, and 
Zenith Epigenetics; fees for participation on the speakers’ bureaus for Clinical 
Care Options, Med Learning Group, Medpage, Medscape, Physicians’ Education 
Resource, PrIME Oncology, and UpToDate; honoraria and patent/royalty payments 
from UpToDate; travel fees from Clinical Care Options, Med Learning Group, 
Medscape, and Physicians’ Education Resource; and consulting/advisory from 
AstraZeneca, Ayala Pharmaceuticals, Medivation/Pfizer, and Pfizer—all 
uncompensated. JTB reports research support (to his institution) from AbbVie, 
Amgen, Ascentage Pharma Group, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boston Biomedical/Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Celgene, Daiichi Sankyo, EMD Serono, Evelo Biosciences, 
Genentech/Roche, GlaxoSmithKline, Hutchison, Immunomedics, Laekna Therapeutics, 
Lilly, Mirati Therapeutics, Nektar, Novartis, Pfizer, Polynoma, and Seattle 
Genetics. JMJ has nothing to disclose. JA reports fees for participation on the 
speakers’ bureaus for AstraZeneca/Daiichi Sankyo, Genentech, Genomic Health, 
Immunomedics, Novartis, Puma Biotechnology, and Seattle Genetics; and 
consulting/advisory fees from AstraZeneca/Daiichi Sankyo, Athenex, 
Biotheranostics, Myriad, Novartis, Pfizer, Puma Biotechnology, and Seattle 
Genetics. LAM was an employee at Banner MD Anderson Cancer Center at the time 
these analyses were performed and has nothing to disclose. RB has nothing to 
disclose. MD reports consulting/advisory fees from Immunomedics, Novartis, 
Pfizer, and Seattle Genetics; and honoraria from Amgen. YY was an employee of 
the City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center and Beckman Research Institute at 
the time of these analyses and reports research support from Eisai, Genentech, 
and Merck; consulting/advisory fees from BCI Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai, 
Genentech, Gilead, Novartis, Pfizer, and Puma Biotechnology; fees for 
participation on the speakers’ bureaus for AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo/Lilly, 
Eisai, Genentech, Gilead, Merck, and Pfizer; and fees for expert testimony for 
Novartis. WFS reports consulting/advisory fees from Almac Diagnostics and Merck; 
support for travel from Luminex and Merck; stock ownership in Delphi 
Diagnostics, Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, ISIS Pharmaceuticals, and Nuvera 
Biosciences; and an uncompensated relationship with Delphi Diagnostics. JFH was 
an employee of Foundation Medicine, Inc. at the time of these analyses. LAA is 
an employee of Foundation Medicine, Inc., and a stockholder of Roche Holdings 
AG. ADL is an employee of Pfizer and may hold Pfizer stock. AA, MM and KN were 
employees at Pfizer at the time of these analyses. JLB was a physician at Texas 
Oncology-Baylor Charles A. Sammons Cancer Center, US Oncology Network at the 
time these analyses were performed and reports consulting/advisory fees and 
honoraria from AstraZeneca, Athenex, Inc., Biotheranostics, Inc., Immunomedics, 
Inc., OncLive, Pfizer, Inc., Puma Biotechnology, Research to Practice, Sanofi, 
Tempus, and TD2 and participation on the speakers’ bureaus for Pfizer, Inc., and 
Tempus.